Teotihuacan is the largest and the most impressive urban archeological site of ancient America, covering area of roughly 20 square kilometers. The city was at one time thought to be religious center of the Toltecs but is now believed to be a creation of an earlier civilization about whose origins is little known. The earliest artifacts from Teotihuacan date from over 2000 years age, but the period of greatest expansion dates from 200 CE to 500 CE. At its peak the city is estimated to have had a population of up to 200,000 inhabitants, with residential areas extending throughout the built-up area. Judging by regionally dispersed finds of the image of the rain god Tlaloc, of “thin orange wear” potter, and of the characteristic architectural forms, the influence of Teotihuacan was widespread. It is not clear what caused the city’s decline and eventual abandonment, but the evidence points to overpopulation, a depletion of resources, and possible sacking of the adversaries.

The primary axis of the city was the Avenue of the Dead, which extends for 2.5 kilometers through the center of the urban area, starting in the north at the Moon Plaza and continuing beyond the Great Compound complexes to the south. The avenue divided Teotihuacan into two sections with apartment compounds arranged on either side, often symmetrically, suggesting highly planned layout from the earliest phases of construction.

The vast Pyramid of the Sun, located in the middle of the central zone, is the tallest and most dominant structure of Teotihuacan, with a height of 65 meters and a base covering approximately 10 acres. At one time the edifice was surmounted by a temple. A cave located underneath the pyramid and possibly used for ritual activities hints at its religious importance. The Pyramids of the Moon and Feather Serpent are other notable ceremonial sites nearby.

A particular feature of the architecture of many of the pyramidal platforms at this site is the series of sloping apron walls, known as tales, interspersed with vertical panels - tableros - producing a step-like appearance. Originally all such structures would have been covered with a layer of stucco and the painted, often with the pictures of animals and mythological creatures.
    