A woman was in the office at the tanning salon where she worked when she noticed a man on the surveillance camera. She was the only employee in the salon at the time. All of a sudden, the man was standing at the door to her office. She was struck over the head and pulled into a van, where her legs and wrists were duct taped together. Luckily, this woman managed to escape by throwing herself out of the van. She suffered a fractured skull and other injuries, but could have suffered a much darker fate. Turns out, forty-nine-year-old Kelly Swoboda had basically transformed his van into a moveable torture chamber—by outfitting it with chains that were mounted to the floor as well as zip ties and ropes. Swoboda was discovered to have notes on about twenty different women. He was following them around and had noted their license plate numbers.

			Most of us have duct tape lying around the house. We use it for packing up boxes or repairing something that needs a quick fix. However, most people don’t know that duct tape has a much more sinister use. If a criminal wants to restrain you during a kidnapping or home invasion, they are most likely going to do so with duct tape. The fact is, once a criminal wraps duct tape around a victim’s wrist, most people mentally give up because they have no idea how to escape from it. However, I know how to break out of it in just a couple of seconds and by the end of this chapter so will you. You’ll also know how to break out of zip ties and escape from handcuffs from the trunk of a car. I have successfully taught these techniques to men and women of all ages (ages nine to seventy-seven, to be exact) from many different backgrounds. My students have found that knowing how to break out of restraints in an emergency situation is empowering and instills confidence.





How to Escape Duct Tape


			A Criminal’s Favorite Restraint


			Kelly Swoboda is by no means the first criminal to use duct tape. It’s the easiest and fastest way to restrain someone. Once you see how easy it can be to get out of, you’ll never be intimidated by it again. I’m not a huge, threatening guy, but because I know what to do, I can get out of duct tape in seconds. I’ve had the opportunity to work with mixed martial artists—huge guys with massive arms. I’ve taped their wrists and asked them to escape. These seriously strong guys will try to pry their hands apart, pulling and pulling on the tape, and they get no results. Being duct taped is psychologically draining. If you don’t know how to get out of it, and you’re just pulling at the tape, you’re eventually going to give up.

			The key to breaking out of duct tape isn’t strength, but knowing how to re-create the angle that makes it easy to rip. If you’ve ever torn off a piece of tape (which I’m sure you have) then you know that if you want to rip the tape you simply tear it at the correct angle. That’s basically what we’re going to do here.





Step 1: Positioning


			When you are being duct taped, lean forward as far as you can, pressing your elbows and forearms closely together. If you are able to, make fists with your hands. The idea here is to create a tight seal with your forearms. Leaning forward also puts you in the “submissive position,” which signals to your attackers that you’re not going to be a problem.





Step 2: The Break


			Remember, you can pull as hard as you want to, and that tape isn’t going to break. You need to re-create an angle that will easily tear the tape. To do this, raise your arms as high above your head as possible. In one quick, swift motion, pull your arms down and out to the sides as if you’re quickly pulling your hands past each hip. You can watch a free video of me doing this duct tape escape at SpySecretsBook.com.





Troubleshooting


			While you’re practicing, if you find the tape isn’t breaking right away, it’s most likely because you are not pulling your arms and hands apart to the side past your hips. Practice the maneuver until you have mastered the movement—a quick, sharp down and apart motion that starts above your head, and ends with you pulling your hands to the side past your hips. The tape will tear once you’ve successfully mastered this motion.





Plan B: If You Are Taped from Behind or Injured


			I’m often asked what happens if a criminal tapes your hands behind you. Chances are, this isn’t going to happen, and a criminal is going to tape your hands in front of you because it’s faster and easier. Plus it allows them to grab your hands so they can lead you where they want to take you. However, should this happen—or should you have sustained an injury that prevents you from re-creating the angle necessary to break the tape, I’m going to teach you a second escape method. While this method is different, the goal remains the same, to re-create the angle that breaks the tape. The alternative method requires that you find something that has a ninety-degree angle—the corner of a wall, a chair, a piece of furniture—anything, and simply put your taped hands in the middle of the edge and do a sawing motion until it tears. If you decide to practice this method as well, you’ll be surprised how quickly the tape will break open.


				Your Hands, Feet, and Mouth Are Covered in Duct Tape. What Would You Do?

				I would free my hands first. This is always the first priority and I would do it exactly as I taught you earlier in this chapter. Next, I would lift the tape off of my mouth so I could breathe better. Last, I would tear the tape off of my feet and legs.

				It’s important to remember that duct tape can drain you psychologically if you let it. If you’re covered in duct tape it’s easy to give up. Don’t. The fact is, a seventeen-year-old girl who took my class with her dad actually wanted to give this a try being fully “duct taped up.” She voluntarily let us cover her practically head to toe in tape. Her legs were taped to about six inches up past her knees, and her arms were covered to the elbows. We also put tape on her mouth. This girl got herself completely free from all of the tape in less than thirty seconds. Not allowing yourself to be intimidated by the tape is just as important as knowing the technique to get out of it.





How to Escape from Zip Ties


			While duct tape remains the most common method criminals use to restrain someone, it is also important that you know how to escape from zip ties should you ever need to. In Jacksonville, Florida, two women, ages eighteen and nineteen, were found dead on the side of the road. Both of the bodies were bound with zip ties. In Chico, California, a physician’s assistant was pulled over for a traffic violation. Turns out, he had a history of kidnapping college-aged women, and then sexually assaulting them. The women had their hands and feet bound with zip ties, and tape covering their eyes.

			Like duct tape, zip ties are difficult to break out of, if you don’t know the correct technique. They are cheap, accessible, and like duct tape, zip ties are psychologically taxing—it’s easy for a victim to believe he won’t be able to escape.





Step 1: Positioning


			While being zip tied, you will want to put your arms out as far in front of you as possible, with your forearms held tightly together. This is the same positioning you used for escaping from duct tape.





Step 2: Rotate the Lock


			You will see that the zip tie holding your hands together has a small lock. You must rotate that lock so that it is placed directly where the palms of your hands meet. It doesn’t need to be perfect, but get it as close to the center as possible. Since you obviously won’t be able to use your hands to do this, you’ll need to bite the end of the zip tie with your teeth, and rotate the lock into the correct position.





Step 3: The Break


			The technique for breaking zip ties is exactly the same as it is with duct tape. You want to raise your hands as high above your head as possible, keeping your forearms tightly together. In one swift movement, you will pull your arms directly down and to the side past your hips. The lock will pop open. You can watch a video of me escaping from zip ties at SpySecretsBook.com.


				Swap Your Shoelaces

				If you don’t want to carry paracord in your briefcase or purse, consider swapping out your normal shoelaces for paracord laces. They are easy to find, come in many different colors, and don’t look any different from regular laces.





Troubleshooting


			Escaping zip ties using this method takes a lot more strength and not everyone can do it. You have to get the perfect angle of pulling your arms and hands apart as you come down. If the angle isn’t perfect it’s not going to work. If you can’t get out this way, don’t worry, because there’s a second method.





Plan B: The Paracord Method


			While it’s been my experience that anyone can escape from duct tape using the break method, as I just mentioned, zip ties can be more difficult for some people. Fortunately there is an alternative method. Remember the paracord I talked about in the previous chapter? This is where it’s going to come in handy.

			Take your paracord out of your pocket, bag, or shoes. Ideally, you need about seven feet of paracord. Insert the paracord through the zip tie so that it’s hanging down in the center of your hands. Next, tie a loop on each end that is large enough for you to put your foot in. Place your feet into the loops of paracord, and recline on your back. Make a bicycling motion with your feet braced in the loops, and you will literally saw right through the zip tie.





How to Escape from Rope


			Eleven days after a married couple went missing from New Orleans, their bodies were found in the Intracoastal Waterway. Their feet were bound with blue nylon rope. The man’s rope was tethered to a thirty-pound kettlebell. The rope around the woman’s feet was frayed, which suggests it had also been attached to something. Leonila Tara Cortez left in a car with a male friend on August 21, 1996, and was never seen alive again. Her family knew something was wrong, as she would never leave behind her two young children. While it took years to correctly identify her body, it was clear that her body had been bound with rope. Again, rope isn’t used as commonly as duct tape, but it’s critical you know how to get out of rope should you find yourself in an extreme situation.





Step 1: The Position


			When you are being tied up, you want to keep your palms together, but your elbows need to be apart. You do not want to press your forearms together the way you would if you were being duct taped. The idea here is to create extra space from the curve in your wrists when you keep your elbows apart.





Step 2: Forward and Shimmy


			After you’ve been tied up while keeping your elbows apart, move your arms forward until they are completely straight and also make sure your hands are flat and pressed together. Once you have done this, begin to shimmy your hands back and forth quickly and eventually you’ll be able to pull one of your hands free. This technique will work regardless of the thickness of the rope, but know that if the rope is thinner, it will take more time and you’ll likely get rope burn. If you want to see exactly how to do this, I’ve created a video for you at SpySecretsBook.com.





Plan B: Escaping Rope with Paracord


			Hopefully you’re starting to see why it’s such a good idea to keep paracord around—or to at least swap out your regular shoelaces for paracord laces. This method is a good backup in case the criminal you encountered is great at tying knots. This technique takes more time—from thirty seconds to five minutes, so you’d want to use this method if you’ve been tossed in a room alone. You will craft two loops onto each end of a long piece of paracord, and insert the paracord through center of the rope between your hands (just as you did when escaping zip ties). You’ll have a loop falling down on each side of the rope. Insert your feet into the loops, recline backward and do the bicycling motion with your feet until you saw straight through the rope.





How to Escape from Handcuffs


			Handcuffs, as you know by now, are not a criminal’s preferred method of restraining a person, but it’s a good idea to know how to break out of them anyway. You’ll be amazed by how easy it is to do this. All you really need is a couple of cheap items. You may already have these things lying around the house—a bobby pin or a barrette.





Method 1: The Bobby Pin


			This is why I always carry a bobby pin. You can easily turn an inexpensive, everyday bobby pin into a tool that will open handcuffs in seconds. If you’re traveling overseas, I highly recommend you keep this tool in your pocket, already made.





Step 1: The Tool


			A set of pliers will make bending the bobby pin exactly the way we need it much easier. Simply use the pliers to straighten out the bobby pin into one straight line. One side of the bobby pin is smooth, and the other has ridges. Take off the little nub on the end of the smooth side of the bobby pin. (You can take it off by clamping down on it with your pliers and stripping it off.) You want to make a minuscule upward bend on the end of the smooth side of the bobby pin. I’m talking about maybe a quarter inch, at about a forty-five-degree angle. You’re basically making a tiny shovel.





Step 2: Escape the Cuffs


			For the purposes of these instructions, I’m talking about using your right hand. Hold your hand so that the teeth of the cuffs (the part that goes into the handcuffs) is on the bottom. You only need to be concerned with the keyhole of the handcuff. The keyhole is a small circle that has a small slot shooting off of the right side. You want to insert your shovel into the small slot portion of the keyhole (you don’t want to be in the round portion at all, just the small slot) and insert the bobby pin into that small slot until you feel it hitting metal. As soon as it hits metal, you pull the bobby pin down toward the ground and then to the right. It’s important to note these are two distinct motions. Once the bobby pin is inserted, you first pull down and then you pull to the side . . . don’t try pulling at an angle or the cuffs won’t open.





Troubleshooting


			 				For the purposes of practicing, know that it’s entirely possible that you’ll take the small bend out of your bobby pin. Simply bend the end back upward into that minuscule angle and try again.

				Make sure you are pulling down and to the right and that you are smooth and gentle. This is not a process that requires a lot of force at all.





Method 2: A Shim Made from a Barrette


			Step 1: The Tool


			You’ll need a simple basic hair barrette, a hair clip that snaps closed. Again, this is a tool you’ll want to make in advance. Your ultimate goal is to turn the barrette into a shim that can be used to block the teeth of the handcuffs so they don’t click shut. The first thing you’ll need to do is break off the middle piece. You can just bend it upward and snap it off. Then you’ll want to break off the fatter, round portion on the top. You can use your pliers to bend this section back and forth until it pops off. Now you have two thinner pieces of metal attached at one end that form a V. The ends of your V will likely be curved upward, so take your pliers and straighten them out. You want the ends of the hair barrette to be as straight as possible.





Step 2: Insert the Shim


			For this method, you’re only going to be working with the part of the handcuffs where the teeth are inserted into the cuff. You’re going to take your barrette that you turned into a shim, and insert it into the space where the teeth go into the cuff. You’re going to have to push down on the teeth of the cuffs and then immediately push the shim all the way down. Pushing on the teeth first gives you momentum to push the shim down. Once you’ve pushed the shim all the way down until it can’t go anymore, you will simply hold it in place and then lift your hand out of the cuffs. (The shim blocks the teeth of the cuffs so it won’t stay closed and you can open it.) Go to SpySecretsBook.com to watch a video demonstrating how to escape from handcuffs using both a bobby pin and a hair barrette.





A Note on the Trunk Challenge


			One of the most challenging and exciting exercises I teach in my Spy Escape and Evasion course is the Trunk Challenge. After mastering the art of getting out of handcuffs, students take their new skills to another level. We take turns practicing escaping from a locked trunk, handcuffed, with a hood over our heads. It sounds like it would be hard, but because my students know exactly what to do, they make it out, sometimes in mere seconds, with the vast majority of people escaping in less than two minutes.

			If you want to be adventurous and re-create the trunk challenge that we do in my course, there are a couple of things you should know. First, take your time and go slowly. The trunk of a car is a small, confined space, your blood pressure is going to go up and you’re going to feel compelled to move faster. Don’t. Take your time and move slowly. If you drop your bobby pin or shim, it’s going to be really hard to find it in the dark. Also know that all newer cars have a glow-in-the-dark emergency release pull. You should be able to locate that without too much trouble. What if you’re in an older model car that doesn’t have an emergency release? Should this ever happen to you, don’t panic. Trunk locks are not especially strong. Get on all fours, and push against the trunk with your back—it will hopefully pop open, depending on the vehicle model. Other options? Kick out the backseat. If you’re going to attempt this challenge, be sure to practice the above-described escape methods first—and have a friend with you to let you out if you run into any problems.





You’ve Been Kidnapped—Now What?


			You should do absolutely everything in your power to fight off a potential kidnapper. This is not a time to be compliant, but to kick, hit, scream, and use a weapon. Jessica Garner of Redding, California, was walking down the street when a man made a motion to her suggesting she look at items he was selling out of his Ford Explorer. When Garner walked away, the man grabbed her shirt and began to drag her toward his vehicle. She kicked at the man and was able to break free. The man drove off. A quick-thinking teenager who had been kidnapped and forced to drive a woman from New Jersey to Philadelphia purposely crashed into a police officer’s car. The teen was able to tell the officer what happened and the kidnapper was arrested on the spot. Not everyone is as lucky. Carlesha Freeland-Gaither was abducted while walking home from a party for her godson. Surveillance video footage shows a man pulling his car over to the side of the road, approaching Freeland-Gaither, and dragging her down the street. At one point she manages to pull her attacker away from the car, but ultimately, she is forced inside.

			If you are not able to fight off kidnappers, you need to know that the first twenty-four hours are critical. This is one of the few things they get right in the movies. Once kidnappers have you in their possession, they’re likely to move you around. It’s possible they’ll move you to a safe house, or even move you several times, making it more difficult for you to be found. Whatever you need to do, make sure you escape within those first twenty-four hours. Besides getting moved to a faraway location, you’re likely at your strongest during this part of the ordeal. In other words, you’ve probably got a belly full of food and plenty of water in you. However, three weeks from now you’ll probably be a lot weaker and it will be much tougher for you to escape because your captors aren’t likely to feed you well and you won’t be able to keep up your strength.

			Once it’s become clear you cannot fight off your attackers, you’ll need to put on an act of compliance. Do not look directly at your kidnapper, and be submissive. However, just because you’re acting compliant and timid doesn’t mean you are giving up—it’s all an act. The reason you want to act submissive is that you do not want the kidnappers to think you require additional security measures. If they’ve duct taped you, and you’re screaming your head off, you don’t want them to decide to padlock you in the trunk because you’re being a problem. While you’re acting compliant, you want to be thinking as carefully as you can about how to escape. You’re looking for that quick lapse in security that will enable you to break free. So, as soon as you see an opening to escape and your captors aren’t around, make a run for it.





Your Inner Spy: Picking Locks, Leaping over Fences and Hot-Wiring Cars


			I don’t recommend jumping over barbed wire fences just for practice—but in the event you’re ever in a real escape and evasion situation, it’s good to know how to do this. And I’m certainly not going to suggest you ever hot-wire a car, since that would be illegal (unless it’s your own car—and you don’t want to do that either, since it will seriously damage the car). I do advocate knowing how to do it, so you’re prepared if hot-wiring a car and driving away is the only thing that will save your life.





The Barbed Wire Fence


			What you’ll need: A heavy flat material that can be used to cover the barbed wire while you’re scaling over the fence. A thick blanket, a mattress, or very large pieces of cardboard in a pinch.

			How it works: While you would want to be extremely careful going over a barbed wire fence, it’s not that difficult to do. You’ll take whatever material you have found to cover the barbed wire fence, toss it over the fence, and cross the fence at that section.





The Razor Wire Fence


			A razor wire fence is designed to seriously cut you. If you try to climb over a razor wire fence there is a good chance you will be cut so badly that you will bleed out and die—or at least not make it very far. At a portion of the Mexican border, a man was recently trapped in the razor wire trying to cross into the United States. It took emergency crews almost an hour to cut him out. In one year alone, twenty-one people had to be rescued from the razor wire. This is something you only want to do if absolutely necessary, and you’ll want to use extreme caution.

			What you’ll need: A team of people, a cane or other type of curved stick, a flat material such as you would use for climbing over a barbed wire fence.

			How it works: Two people on the team will take the cane or other long object and hook it onto the razor wire and pull the loops of razor wire down until they are flat. While two members of the team are holding the razor wire flat, the others will cover the razor wire with the flat surface and climb over. Once the first set of team members has crossed the fence, they will use the cane or long object to hold the fence flat while the remaining members cross.





How to Hot-Wire a Car


			I seriously hope that none of us ever ends up in a situation so chaotic and desperate that your only choice is to hot-wire a car to escape. Before we go any further, there’s one thing I need to be clear about. You cannot practice this technique on your car—or anyone else’s for that matter. This will do serious damage to the car. I do know one person who actually found himself in a situation where he needed to use this method. He was swimming, in a swimming hole in the middle of nowhere. Guess what? He left his car keys in his shorts and lost his keys in the swimming hole. Luckily, his car was an older model vehicle, and he had tools in his car. He was able to follow these instructions, hot-wire his car, and get himself home. Obviously this guy was in a tough spot, but don’t forget that doing this will really mess up your car.





The Right Car


			Before we get into the specifics, I want to take a moment to talk about procuring a car to hot-wire in a dire emergency. First, take a look around and see if there are any cars with unlocked doors, or keys just sitting there in the seat. The real jackpot would be finding an unlocked tow truck. Why? Tow trucks have a master set of keys, and this set is basically going to get you into any car around. Obviously a tow truck might not be right there for the taking, or you won’t find a car that’s unlocked. Your next best bet is to find an older model car—I’m talking 1999 and before.

			These older model cars are actually everywhere. Once people start noticing them, they are often surprised that there are so many older model cars still out there. Make a point of looking for them when you’re out on the road. I guarantee you’ll start seeing them everywhere.


What You’ll Need

			 				Wire cutters and strippers

				Pliers

				Flathead and Phillips-head screwdrivers

				Hammer

				Insulated gloves

				A car

				Electrical tape



			How it works: This is a rather simple process, but I’d recommend keeping a set of these instructions in your car, or maybe your laptop bag or purse, for a dire emergency. Since this isn’t a technique you can practice, it’s entirely possible you won’t remember how to do it in an emergency situation.


Once you’ve found the car you’re going to hot-wire, insert a flathead screwdriver into the ignition as you would a key. Pound the screwdriver into the ignition with your hammer. You will want to turn the screwdriver just as you would a key that’s in the ignition. If you’re having trouble turning the screwdriver, use your pliers to help you. Sometimes, if you’re really lucky, this action is enough to start the car.

				Use a Phillips-head screwdriver to remove the screws in the plastic panel above and below your steering column. When the panels are removed you’re going to see several wires under the steering column.

				Locate the two red wires. These wires provide power to the vehicle.

				Put on your insulated gloves.

				Cut both ends of the red wires and strip the ends. Twist the ends of the two red wires together. (One red wire from each of the wires you cut. So don’t twist the ends of the same wire, but the two different wires together.)

				Locate the brown wires; these wires connect to the starter. Some cars will have one brown wire, others will have two.

				Cut both of the brown wires and strip the ends.

				If there are two brown wires: Touch the two brown wires together to start the car. Once the car is started, do not let the wires touch again. They must be kept separate. You can wrap them with electrical tape to keep them from touching. This will also keep you from getting shocked.



			If there is one brown wire: If the car has only one brown wire, touch the brown wire to the red wires to start the car. Once the car starts, separate the wires, and put electrical tape over the end of the one brown wire.


				Breaking Car Windows

				Should you ever need to break into a car to save your life, and you need to do this undetected, duct tape is going to be very helpful. Place large pieces of tape on the window in an X. This will keep the glass from shattering everywhere and making noise. Also, to break the window, use your tactical pen, or another object, to strike the window at the corners. This is where the glass is tightest and most likely to break. If you strike the window in the center, and the object is not strong enough, it’s just going to bounce off.





Picking Locks


			It should absolutely go without saying that you shouldn’t pick anyone’s lock . . . unless they ask you to. In fact, I’m asked to do it all the time in my neighborhood. If anyone gets locked out, I’m the guy they go to. Lock pick sets are inexpensive and fun to use, and if you follow these instructions, you’ll be the person the neighbors call when they’ve lost their keys. Before we go on, you can see the credit card–size lock pick set that I use at SafeHomeGear.com. Also, because I’m often asked, you won’t damage a lock if you practice picking it five or ten times. However, if you do it hundreds of times you will damage a lock. In other words, picking the lock on your front door every now and then won’t do it any harm. But if you spend two hours a day practicing on the lock then you’ll need to replace it.





How Safe Is Your Lock?


			Before we get into actual lock picking, I want to talk about how important it is that you have a good safe lock on your home. I was in the Salt Lake area not too long ago when I decided to pop into my brother’s new house. He wasn’t home, but that wasn’t a problem. Within a few seconds I was inside his house and helping myself to his snacks. My brother, like most Americans, had an incredibly easy lock to pick. About 75 percent of locks on doors are made by Kwikset, and in my experience they are incredibly easy to open with simple tools. A common criminal is not likely to have a problem picking your lock if you have a Kwikset lock. These locks are used by contractors everywhere because they are easy to come by (you can get them at any big-box building supply store), and of course, inexpensive. I highly recommend you replace your locks if you have Kwikset. It’s not a huge investment, and your family will be safer as a result. Schlage and Medeco are two brands of locks that I personally like to use.





The L Rake and the Tension Wrench


			All you need to pick a lock are an L rake and a tension wrench. I carry both of these around with me at all times in my credit card lock pick set. The hardest part about picking a lock is finding the correct amount of pressure when you use the tension wrench. If you use too much tension, the lock is going to think it’s some kind of intrusion and not open. You’re using a minimal amount of tension. Basically you need to dial back whatever you think is right about ten times. So remember this when you’re inserting the tension wrench in the following step. Also be aware that lock picking takes finesse. The more you practice, the faster you’ll be able to determine if you’re executing the technique properly.





Step 1: Insert the Tension Wrench


			Again, using a featherweight pressure, insert the tension wrench into the bottom of the lock. The long portion of the tool will be hanging off to the side. Place your finger on the tension wrench and apply an absolutely minimal amount of pressure.





Step 2: Insert the L Rake


			Note: You must keep consistent pressure on the tension wrench the entire time you are picking the lock. If you apply additional pressure, it’s not going to work.

			You’re going to insert the L rake into the lock with the ridged portion on top. You’re going to scrape the L rake back and forth while applying slight pressure toward the top of the L rake. Think of the L rake as a toothbrush and you’re brushing the teeth of the lock . . . that’s the motion you want to use going in and out of the lock.





Step 3: Locate the Fifth Pin


			Note: You’ve successfully picked a lock when you’ve tricked the lock into believing all five pins have been have been manipulated properly. It’s really common to have four pins moved after just a few seconds, and then you’ll need to change your movement to locate that fifth pin.

			To locate the fifth pin, you’re going to change the movement you’re making with the L rake. You are now going to jerk the L rake up and down, making sure you’re still going all the way to the front and the back of the lock. When the fifth pin is hit, you feel pressure on the tension wrench, and the lock will open.

			Some people in my course get this down right away, while it takes longer for others. Lock picking, while not hard to do, takes practice. Once you get the feel of how to manipulate the tools in a way that hits all the pins, you’ll be able to pick a lock within seconds. Also the beauty of this technique is that not only can you use this to open door locks, but also padlocks and even filing cabinets. (Rachael Ray had me on her show and I demonstrated how to pick a filing cabinet lock in less than thirty seconds. To watch a video where I show you how to pick locks, visit SpySecretsBook.com.)