It was around 3 a.m. when I heard the noise. It was loud enough that it woke up my wife as well. None of our alarms had gone off—but I knew I had to immediately determine whether someone had gotten into our home. I launched into my simple but well-practiced home defense plan. I grabbed my flashlight off of my nightstand, opened my safe, grabbed my gun, and went to the top of the stairs. I did all of this in less than seven seconds.

			After not hearing any noise and making an announcement to get out of my house, I went downstairs to clear the house. It turned out there wasn’t an intruder at all. An air mattress had crashed down from a shelf, making a loud thud. Everything was fine that night at my house—but unfortunately many Americans aren’t as lucky as my family was.

			Home invasions can happen anywhere to anyone. In Millburn, New Jersey, a suburb of New York City, a man burst into a home where he violently beat a mother of two for ten minutes. The attack was captured on film thanks to a nanny cam. It turns out that the suspect had a violent past, with twelve prior criminal convictions. In Staten Island, New York, sixty-seven-year-old Peter Gialluisi unknowingly walked in on a burglar in his garage after returning home from a family party. He was fatally stabbed, and his wife was seriously injured.

			Home invasions are on the rise. Many people think, “That won’t happen to me” when they hear a news story about a home invasion. But there are a few statistics from the FBI that you should be aware of:


One in five homes will be the victim of a break-in or home invasion.

				85% of burglars case homes before a home invasion.

				50% of burglars portray service men (FedEx, UPS, etc.) before a home invasion.

				94% of burglars are high on drugs when they are invading a home.

				30% of violent assaults take place during a home invasion.

				60% of rapes take place during a home invasion.

				33% of burglars enter the home through an unopened door or window.



			There are also two kinds of burglars. Your day burglar is a professional. This is the guy who will have already cased your house. He knows when you’re away, and he’s going to break in when you’re at work. You will have no idea that he was there until your go to look for your diamond bracelet or your laptop computer. While I certainly hope you don’t encounter a daytime burglar, you should know that nighttime burglars are an even greater concern. This is because the guy who is going to rob you in the middle of the night is dangerous. This guy is most likely high on drugs or mentally ill, and he doesn’t care whether you’re home or not. In fact, he may want you to be home. If you’re home, you can tell him where you keep the extra cash or how to get in the safe. These guys are ruthless, and you don’t want them anywhere near you or your family.





Think Like a Criminal


			While all of this might sound incredibly scary, there is some good news. By putting ourselves in the mind-set of a criminal, we can easily determine whether our homes are appealing to them. Some very simple, inexpensive changes can help a criminal decide that he wants to skip your house altogether.





Tactic One: Case Your Own Neighborhood


			How a Nice Family Walk Can Prevent a Break-In


			The first strategy is literally as easy as taking a stroll down your street, but what you learn on this walk may stop a burglar from breaking into your house. What do you see when you look at all the other houses on your block? Put yourself in the mind-set of a burglar. Which house would you want to rob? Which houses looks inhabited—like someone is home right now? Which houses give away signals that someone hasn’t been around? Look for the signals that a burglar seeks out to determine whether someone is home. Observe newspapers, mail, or any other papers that are delivered. Are newspapers lying in a pile on the sidewalk? Is mail bursting out of the mailbox? What do the lawns look like? Are they mowed and well cared for? Who leaves their garage door open (more on that in a bit)? These are all open invitations to burglars—they all suggest that the house is unoccupied. It’s also especially important to bring in the trash cans after the garbage is picked up. It’s easy for burglars to figure out when trash day is, and then note who still has their trash cans out a few days later, meaning that homeowner is probably out of town. You want your home to project a secure image. Noting who has these particular items in check is the first step toward making sure your house appears to be the most secure house on the street.





Are You Expecting a Package?


			In a quiet New York City neighborhood, a thirty-four-year-old man answered the door for a man with a FedEx package. The individual was hit in the face with a gun when he opened the door, and robbed by three armed men. A couple of thousand dollars in cash, an iPhone and jewelry were taken. In Bowie, Maryland, Richard Peeks was doing yard work at his home when he was approached by a man dressed as a FedEx employee carrying a box. The “FedEx worker” asked Peeks for a glass of water, and before he knew what was happening, the guy pulled out a gun. A St. Louis, Missouri, woman is lucky to be alive after a confrontation with a fake UPS driver. A man posed as a UPS delivery person and told Bernice Cook that he had a package for her. He was holding a cardboard box and a clipboard. He forced his way into her home and proceeded to bind her hands and wrists with duct tape. He then duct taped her to the handle of her kitchen stove and demanded money and jewelry.

			It’s crucial to be cautious when accepting packages. If you’re not expecting something, don’t answer the door. If you want to confirm whether a delivery person is real, locate the number to the company yourself and call to confirm if there is a package for you. Obviously, if you feel threatened you should call the police immediately . . . but don’t simply believe someone just because he shows up in a uniform and claims to work for a particular company.





It’s Not Just the Delivery Man You Need to Be Concerned About


			Many of us have come home to find a sticker from UPS or FedEx indicating there’s a package for us. The next time this happens, remove the sticker immediately, and make sure there really is a package. Be on the lookout for anything stuck to your doors and windows in general. Peter Hart of Fresh Meadows, Queens, was lucky that he noticed a piece of black electrical tape on his window. He told CBS New York, “The first initial thought was, what the heck is it?” Then he realized, “Could that be someone that’s marking the house?” Tape, like FedEx slips, can be used by burglars to mark a house they’ve been casing. If the tape is still there a few days later, they’ll assume the person isn’t home and will proceed with their plans to break in. In Ireland, criminal gangs took this practice to a new level. Chalk markings started appearing outside of homes in Dublin and Limerick. Turns out, the symbols are used by a recon unit to communicate information to burglars. They used a variety of symbols that conveyed “good target,” “too risky,” “nothing worth stealing,” “wealthy,” “alarmed house,” “already been burgled,” and the even more disturbing “nervous and afraid” and “vulnerable female easily conned.” Being aware of any papers, flyers, or unusual markings on your home is essential for keeping you and your family safe.





Tactic Two: Case Your Own House


			Most of us probably spend more time than we’d like to taking care of our homes. We want our houses to look inviting and attractive. We mow our lawns, plant flowers, and take pride in our landscaping. However, it’s entirely possible we’re attracting more than we bargained for with our hard work. Criminals are looking at our houses too—carefully calculating how easy it would be to break in and help themselves to our valuables. Unfortunately, some of the things we may be doing to make our houses look more desirable are telling criminals to come on in and help themselves. That’s why it’s important to not only case your neighborhood but to case your house, just like a criminal would, to see what elements of your home are making you vulnerable to criminal activity.

			Walk around the entire perimeter of your home. Note any places where a criminal could potentially hide, including any overgrown shrubs or bushes. You want to make sure that if someone is in your yard, either you or your neighbors are easily going to see them.

			Also look for symbols that suggest your home is full of valuables. Is there an expensive car parked in your driveway? Is your extremely large flat screen TV easily visible from the front yard because you forgot to close the blinds? I’m not suggesting that you make your house look shabby, or that you don’t enjoy your fancy car if you have one. That being said, you want to be careful about advertising your valuables to potential criminals. The less they know about what you have, the better.





Clean Up for Safety


			While a child’s scooter or bicycle in the front yard might seem completely innocent, it’s important that these items are always carefully stored away and locked up at the end of the day. A scooter makes an excellent device for breaking glass windows. The same goes for any tools or other objects that can be used as a projectile. Any garden implements, shovels, or other tools need to be out of sight and securely locked.





Tactic Three: Case Your House at Night


			While you can learn a lot by casing your house during the day, it’s important to repeat the process at night. Walk the perimeter and think about where you’d hide if you were a criminal. Would you know if there was someone hiding behind the area where you keep your trashcans? Is it too dark to tell? Note dark spots where criminals could hide, especially near your front door. Pay attention to lighting. Is the perimeter of your home well lit? Would you be able to see an intruder approaching? Take note of what the weaknesses are. I’ll address these issues in a moment when we talk about physical and psychological tricks that will keep criminals away.





Don’t Forget About the Garage


			A violent robbery in Indianapolis could have been prevented if the garage door had been locked. At approximately 7:30 a.m., four men forced their way into a home, threatening a man, his wife, and his daughter. They took cell phones, cash, and car keys. The incident turned violent, and the woman was shot in the leg. Turns out, the family had forgotten to shut their garage door, providing an easy entrance point for the criminals. Make a point of locking the door in your house that leads to the garage, just as you would your front door.

			It’s easy to forget to close the garage door itself. We’re opening it to get out bikes and scooters for kids or maybe we’re hauling out garbage to the curb. We forget that for most of us, access to the garage means access to the house. It’s also important to block site lines into the garage. You don’t want criminals knowing if there are valuables in the garage, or seeing whether or not there’s a car inside. No car usually means no one is home.

			You also need to find a safe storage place for your garage door opener. I know it’s convenient to leave it in your car, but think twice about keeping it there when you’re not in your car. Criminals know that most people leave their garage door openers in their cars. If they want to gain access to your home, all they have to do is break open your car window and grab the garage door opener. To ensure you won’t hear them doing this, they’ll simply put duct tape on your car window to minimize the sound of the glass breaking. Last, if you’re going away for an extended period of time, padlock your garage. Obviously this isn’t something you want to be bothered with every day, but it’s an extra security measure worth taking if you’re on vacation.





Psychological and Physical Tricks


			In addition to physical security such as motion-detector lights, deadbolts, and an alarm system, it is possible to secure your home using a powerful combination of physical and psychological tricks. These tricks are easy and inexpensive and will make burglars think twice about robbing your home.





Home Security Signage


			As I’ve said, it’s great to have an actual security system, but whether you have one or not, the signs alone are a big deterrent. This may sound silly, but if a burglar thinks there is even a chance you have an alarm system, they will likely move on to the next house that has no signs at all. This is why you need a sign for your yard. Security signs are usually about two feet high and on a pole. Place the sign in a prominent spot in your front yard. You’ll also want to put the security stickers in as many windows as possible. I’d recommend placing them on any windows near doorways, as well as basement windows. Sliding glass doors should also have security stickers.





The Invisible Dog


			If you have a dog, great. Dogs can definitely add another layer of protection to your home. Whether or not you actually have a dog, purchase large dog bowls to be displayed near your front and back door. This is one of the easiest and most effective home security tips I can give you. Dogs are loud. Burglars don’t want to deal with your dog. If they think it’s even possible you have one, they’ll likely skip your house and look for an easier target.





Am I on Camera?


			Burglars do not want to be caught on film committing a crime. Real working security cameras are terrific, but it’s understandable if this expense isn’t in your budget. A terrific backup is a knock-off of the real security camera. What makes the fake effective is that it has a battery-operated red blinking light and looks exactly like the real thing. If criminals see a blinking light, they’re not going to waste time wondering whether the camera is real. They’re going to get out of there before there’s evidence of them actually committing a crime.

			A client of mine decided to install fake security cameras. Turns out, not long after he installed his fake cameras, his neighbor’s house was burglarized. After the burglary, his neighbor came over and asked if he could please pull the footage from his security cameras so that he could see who broke into his home and give the footage to police. My client stood there for a minute, a bit uncomfortable, before fessing up to the neighbor that his cameras were actually fake. It’s certainly possible that the criminal skipped out on his house with the cameras and blinking lights, and opted for the less secure home next door.





The Peephole: You Need to Know Who Is on the Other Side


			I hope I don’t need to tell you why it’s a bad idea to answer the door if you don’t know who is there. Honestly, I don’t answer the door for anyone. It’s not worth it. We don’t have anything delivered to our home (not even pizza), and I have our mail delivered to a post office box, so there is little reason anyone I’m not expecting should be ringing my doorbell. A regular, traditional peephole is definitely useful because you can see what’s happening outside. Obviously, you have to get very close to the door to use it, and you don’t want anyone breaking it down. If you’re up for making a larger hole in your door, there are great peepholes that allow you to see who is outside from ten feet away. You don’t even have to get close to your door. Just remember, if you’re not installing a peephole, you’ve got to know who is on the other side before you open that door by looking through one of your windows.





You Can’t Just Ignore It


			While I firmly believe you should never open a door unless you know who is there, it’s also important that you don’t just ignore it. Criminals will often ring your doorbell to determine whether you are home. If you are, they might ask you if you want work done on your house (you don’t). A friend of mine heard repeated, insistent knocking on her front door shortly after she moved into her house in New Jersey. She didn’t know the guy who was there, and in her gut she felt like something was wrong. She called the police, but in the meantime the knocking got louder. She yelled through the door, “What do you want?” And the guy said, “Oh, is this house for sale?” The second she told him it wasn’t, he ran off.

			Two men in Colorado Springs are being sought in a rash of daytime burglaries. It is believed that they are breaking into homes after knocking on front doors and ringing doorbells and finding there’s no one answering. In Greenwood, Indiana, residents have been urged not to ignore knocks on their doors. A woman at home heard someone knocking on her front door. She ignored it, but then heard a knock at her kitchen door. An individual then tried to break into her front door by ramming it with his shoulder several times. The woman was able to call 911, and the burglar fled the scene.





The Secure Door


			So why is it important to have a peephole and a plan of action if there’s a knock at the door and you have no idea who it is? The front door is where 70 percent of home invasions occur. For most Americans, a deadbolt on a door that’s about three-quarters of an inch thick is all that stands between themselves and a criminal. A horrifying scene unfolded in the home of fifty-nine-year-old Enrique Montes of Phoenix. At about 12:30 a.m., several armed men broke into his home by kicking down the door. The first intruder pointed a gun at Montes. He attempted to push the gun away, and the two began fighting. The fight continued in the home’s bedroom, hallway, and kitchen. A second intruder entered the house armed with a rifle and held the other residents in the house hostage. The struggle ended tragically, as Montes was fatally shot in the chest.

			Terrifying footage of a woman hiding on her roof from an intruder made headlines recently. Melora Rivera climbed out of her second floor window to hide on the roof when she realized there was an intruder in her home. Photos show the young woman crouched under the eaves in her pajamas, while the intruder pops out of a window to look for her. Turns out, a mentally ill homeless man had simply popped out a panel window in her front door, and reached in to unlock it. Luckily the woman was able to grab her phone to call 911 before escaping onto her roof. As both of these stories indicate, having secure doorways is a key component to keeping potential intruders out of your home.


				How to Answer the Door If You Have To

				As I’ve said, I don’t answer the door unless I’m expecting friends or family. If there’s someone at the door who you aren’t expecting, simply speak to the person through the door, and find out what they want. Most front doors aren’t soundproof, so you can have a conversation without actually opening the door.





I’m Not the Only One Who Can Pick Your Lock in Under Thirty Seconds


			By now, most of my neighbors know about my background. As I’ve mentioned, this means that when they’re locked out, they often ask me to pick their locks for them. I’m pretty good at this, and it’s easy for me to do. But guess what? I’m not the only one who can pick a lock. Criminals can do it too. There’s an easy way to make this job much more difficult for them—to the point that they’ll see your lock and want to skip your house all together. Change your locks. Remember, Kwikset locks, the typical lock you’re going to find on a new home, or in apartment buildings, are easy to pick. As you learned in the last chapter, with a bit of practice, you can pick these locks almost as quickly as you could open a door with a key. Invest in a solid sturdy lock, such as the ones made by Schlage or Medeco.





Driveway Alarm


			If you live at the end of a long rural driveway, or your house is fairly isolated, a driveway alarm may be a worthwhile security measure for you to take. As crazy as it sounds, it’s not unusual for burglars to park right in your driveway. They want quick access to their car for an immediate getaway. Ramona Corrigan of Orange Park, Florida, received an alarming phone call from a neighbor one day. Her neighbor called to let her know that a thief was breaking into her home. Her neighbor had the good sense to call 911 when she saw a truck parked in Corrigan’s driveway, and noted the person driving the truck had entered the house. Turns out, the burglar was helping himself to jewelry, cash, a revolver, and Corrigan’s father’s military medals. Obviously, I’m not suggesting that you need to call the police every time a person uses your driveway to turn around. But if you live in an isolated area, a driveway alarm is a great idea. I also can’t stress enough that if you come home to find a strange car parked in your driveway, do not go into your house. Call the police, and do not enter your home until you know it is completely safe.





The Safest House on the Block: Safety Measures You Can Take Today


			Now that you’ve cased your house (during the day and at night) and your neighborhood, you can start to implement some of the physical tactics that will help keep your home safe from criminals.





Sight Lines


			You want to be sure that you increase visibility throughout your yard as much as possible. There should be no hiding spots. Trees and hedges should be trimmed to a maximum of two to three feet high. Consider pruning trees so that criminals can’t climb them to gain access to a second floor or attic.





Lighting


			Install motion-activated floodlights around your home. It’s a myth that bright lights will help burglars see what they’re doing. They don’t want you to see them, and bright lights are going to stop them from wanting to rob your house. Make sure that any lights you install are tamper proof.





Secure Your Windows


			Most burglars enter a house through the doorway or an open window. Get in the habit of checking regularly that closed windows are locked. Don’t assume that just because a family member closed a window that they remembered to lock it. Window coverings are key. At night, no one should be able to see into your home. You don’t want a criminal to be able to look directly into your window to see whether you are home. Using landscaping gravel under windows helps eliminate a burglar’s ability to creep silently near your home. The crunching sound could alert you to the fact that someone may be outside. Tara Nicole, a woman who took my Spy Escape and Evasion training, suffered greatly as a child because of an open window. Tara was kidnapped through her open bedroom window when she was six years old. All Tara remembers is waking up in the hospital surrounded by stuffed animals. The kidnapper had slit her throat and left her to die on the side of the road. Tara was lucky; years later it was discovered that her kidnapper had abducted seven other children. The last one he kidnapped he killed.


				Use Extra Caution

				 					Doggy doors are dangerous and not worth the convenience. It’s too easy for a criminal to slip into your house through one.

					Secure air-conditioner units. A criminal can pop out a window unit quickly and have immediate access to your home.

					Fences will not protect you. Fences are great for helping keep pets and children safe. However, a fence is easy to open, and takes no time to climb. Unless your fence is thirty feet high, it’s not going to keep you or your family safe.





There’s an Intruder—Now What?


			Trust me, you don’t want to wait until you actually suspect someone has broken into your home to think about what to do. You don’t want to have to figure out how to protect your family when you hear the sound of glass breaking. It’s crucial that you have a solid home defense plan, and it’s also important that you take the time to practice it. Let me tell you about my home defense plan, which as you may remember worked great the one time I thought someone might be breaking in. If I hear a suspicious sound, or our alarm system goes off:


What I’ll Be Doing

			 				I’ll grab my flashlight, open my quick-opening safe and grab my gun.

				I’ll run to the top of the stairs, because the stairs are our choke point. This is the place where a criminal will be forced to pass if he is to get to my wife and kids.

				I’m going to tell the intruder I’ve called 911 and I have gun.

				If the criminal is foolish enough to come up the stairs to attack me and my family I will do what’s necessary to stop him.




What My Wife Will Be Doing

			 				My wife is going to call 911.

				Then she’s going to try and get our children and herself in the same room while I’m at the top of the stairs blocking the choke point.





Keep It Simple


			A good home defense plan should be simple and quick. When someone is breaking into your house, your heart is going to be pounding—and research now shows that your brain loses IQ points during stress. Strong emotions such as fear, anxiety, or anger (technically, joy too) sets off the amygdala and impairs the working memory of the prefrontal cortex. This is why it’s easy to be overwhelmed in an intensely stressful situation. Thankfully this is only temporary, but again, you don’t want to overcomplicate your home defense plan and forget something critical that may cost you your life. Your home defense plan should include three basic tactics:


Flashlight and weapon (I use a gun, but you could use a knife, bat, or other blunt object).

				Family member who calls 911.

				A chokepoint (defense position) where you will go to make sure that nobody gets past you.




				My Home Defense Nightstand

				There’s nothing worse than the idea of being violated in your own home. I currently have a few things on my nightstand to help me stop a home invasion should someone try to break in. There’s nothing fancy about my nightstand. It’s about twenty-four by eighteen inches. Right on top is my Gunvault MV500-STD Microvault. In my gun safe is a loaded Sig Sauer P226. Attached to this gun is a Viridian laser/light combination, model C5L. I also keep a spare magazine in the safe. There is a dedicated prepaid cell phone on my nightstand as well. That phone is always there so that I have at least one cell phone for an emergency call. If I add my regular cell phone to the table I have a backup. You should have one working flashlight available at all times. I happen to have four. (I really like flashlights, if you haven’t already noticed.) I have the Surefire 6PX Pro, a NexTorch TA1, and an Olight T10, along with my Spy Flashlight. In my experience, all of these flashlights have worked well. This is a simple setup that gives me what I need in case my home alarm goes off in the middle of the night and I have to act fast to protect my family.





Where to Safely Store Valuables in Your House


			About 95 percent of criminals head straight to the master bedroom. Criminals know that the master bedroom is where cash and jewelry are most likely to be kept. That’s why the master bedroom is absolutely the worst place to keep these things. You should be creative about where you keep your cash and valuables in your house. That being said, it’s not a bad idea to leave a decoy in the master bedroom. Keeping one piece of jewelry or maybe $20 to $50 in cash might lead the burglar to think he got everything.





Books and Pantries: The DIY Solution


			So where should you keep your money? Believe it or not, even though it sounds corny, the hollowed out book is a perfectly good place to keep your cash. I have lots of books in my home, and there’s no way a burglar is going to take the time to open and search each book for money. You can buy these books online, or easily make one yourself by taking a razor blade and hollowing out a few pages. Another safe DIY money storage trick is the hollowed out can. Simply take a can opener and open up the bottom of a can of vegetables—something you have a lot of in your pantry or cupboard. Do not remove the bottom of the can, just open it. Use a fork or a butter knife to pry the bottom open, and insert your money. The can will appear untampered with, and a criminal isn’t going to go through your entire pantry looking for suspicious cans.


				My Partner Travels Frequently for Work. What Can I Do to Make Sure I Keep My Family Safe When I’m Home Alone?

				The simplest thing you can do is to get an alarm system. Some people don’t realize that you can still use your alarm system while you’re at home during the day. Security systems have a “stay” or “home mode” feature. This basically means that the motion detectors are off, so you can move about freely. However, the alarm is going to go off should someone open the door or a window. You’ll know immediately if someone has broken into your home while you’re inside during the day.

				If you’re home alone (with or without children), be sure to practice the same security measures that are part of your security routine. Make sure the door is locked, and double-check that all of your windows are closed and locked. Make sure you bring in your mail and newspapers and that your garbage cans aren’t left on the street.





Fireproof Protection


			If you want to keep valuables safe from fire, fireproof safes are affordable and easy to find. Many of them are small and are perfect for documents, cash, and jewelry. That being said, there’s nothing to stop that burglar from simply picking up your safe and walking away with whatever’s inside. If you go for this option, choose a model that can be bolted to the floor, or find a creative place to hide your safe. You might want to keep it in a box in the attic marked “old clothes,” or “books.” Whatever you do, remember, don’t keep your fireproof safe in your master bedroom.

			If you have a gun safe, this can also be a great place to store valuables. However, do not keep your gun safe somewhere conspicuous, like near the front door. It is also crucial that your gun safe be securely bolted to the floor.