After JetBlue flight 1416 lost its right engine, the cabin began to fill with smoke, and passengers could no longer see the people seated next to them. Passenger Jonathon Hubbard told CNN that he realized he would “have a hard time breathing soon” but oxygen masks did not drop down. Flight attendants went around and deployed them by hand. The plane made a sharp turn back toward the airport. Passengers described how the plane was quaking, and people were crying, terrified by what was happening. Fortunately, the pilot was able to land the plane safely, and only four people were injured. A Southwest Airlines flight from Sacramento, California, made an emergency landing in Los Angeles after the wing flaps malfunctioned. An American Airlines flight headed to Dallas circled in the sky for two hours to burn off fuel so that it could make an emergency landing after the plane blew a tire on takeoff. Even though these types of incidents happen, air travel remains the safest form of travel. If you are flying with a major airline, you have about a 1 in 4.7 million chance of being killed. That being said, incidents happen beyond crashes that you need to be prepared for, such as emergency landings (which can be just as deadly). In the unlikely event there is ever an emergency situation when you are traveling on a plane, there are some tactics you can use to increase your chances of getting out alive.





Ninety Seconds to Safety


			We’ve all seen horrible footage of the aftermath of plane crashes. Based on what most of us have seen on the news, it’s easy to assume that all crashes are equally deadly, and you have no chance of surviving whatsoever. The truth is, most passengers don’t die from the impact of the crash, but from the smoke inhalation that takes place in fires after impact. In 2005, an Air France Airbus overran the runway in Toronto. The post-crash fire was serious, but all 309 passengers escaped. There were no life-threatening injuries. By the time emergency response teams arrived at the scene, most of the passengers had already managed to exit the aircraft via evacuation slides. The FAA requires that all of a plane’s passengers must be able to be evacuated in ninety seconds. This small amount of time represents the approximate amount of time you have to get out before you are likely to die from smoke inhalation or fire.

			In December 2012, there were only two fatalities in a crash in Rangoon that resulted in the complete burning of a plane. A German journalist who was on board described how he felt the landing gear go down and everything was fine. But suddenly, people were shouting and crying in panic. “A few seconds later, there was fire at the back and out the front. Black smoke filled the plane, and I couldn’t breathe or see anything anymore and I realized that something really bad was happening.” The journalist recalls the incident happening very quickly, with only about thirty seconds passing between hitting the ground and smoke filling the cabin. The emergency exits were opened by the cabin crew. The passengers all escaped, and the plane burned completely within three minutes. Unfortunately, not all emergencies have such positive endings.

			In February 1991, a USAir 737 and a SkyWest commuter plane collided at Los Angeles International Airport. Tragically, everyone on board the commuter plane was killed. While the majority of the passengers on the 737 survived the collision, twenty-two of the passengers died as flames and smoke took over the plane, and it was believed that seventeen of those passengers were making their way to the exits when they were killed by the smoke. James Burnett, the head of the National Transportation Safety Board investigative team, told People magazine, “I can’t think of a recent accident where this many people have been up out of their seats and didn’t make it out.” Chaos took over, and people were piled up near a rear exit, desperately trying to get out. The exit was blocked eight or nine people deep. While the tragic outcome of this event was investigated heavily by authorities, and changes are continually being made to improve outcomes in the case of crashes and fires, there are some tactics you can take to increase your chances of survival in a crash, emergency landing, or fire.





Don’t Freeze, Move


			With only ninety seconds to exit a plane in an emergency, it’s obviously crucial that you act immediately and quickly. It’s hard to believe, but when faced with a life or death situation, it’s not uncommon to completely freeze. This is yet another example of how normalcy bias causes us trouble. Dwayne Bennett, who was twenty-seven at the time of the USAir collision, recalled to People that as he was trying to escape, he heard a woman shout, “Help me, I can’t get out.” She was so panicked she was unable to unbuckle her own seat belt. This is not an uncommon reaction.

			Floy Olson and her husband, Paul Heck, a retired middle-school teacher, overcame normalcy bias and survived the worst aircraft disaster in history. In 1977, 582 people died when two 747 jumbo jets collided in the Canary Islands. Ten years after the crash, Olson recounted her experience to the Los Angeles Times. She credits her husband’s quick reaction with saving her life. “I was in shock, and I would have perished if it hadn’t been for my husband. I heard a woman shout, ‘We’ve been bombed!’ That’s what I thought, and I thought I was dying. I heard my husband shout, ‘Floy, unfasten your seat belt. Let’s get out!’” Olson and Heck made it onto the wing, but were forced to jump two stories to safety. Olson hit her head and lost consciousness for a few minutes. She managed to force herself to crawl away from the plane before it exploded. Olson also told the Los Angeles Times that she was never afraid during her escape. She recounted, “I’ve often wondered why. I didn’t have fear, and I can’t explain it because I’m a very emotional person. . . . I just knew I had to keep going.” No one can predict how they will feel in the face of such an emergency, but with ninety seconds until the fire burns throughout the entire plane, you must motivate yourself and your family to move immediately.





Leave It Behind


			It should go without saying, but the brain behaves oddly in emergencies—so tell yourself to leave all personal items behind. In the USAir collision, a woman’s purse got caught in the exit. She insisted on taking it because she was afraid of losing her credit cards. Another passenger expressed regret at leaving her violin inside the plane (miraculously, the violin was found later, still intact). In the crash in Rangoon, the German journalist tried to take her carry-on with her. She was concerned about being without a passport. Of course we all know that ultimately physical things such as musical instruments and passports aren’t as important as our own lives—but when you’re faced with disaster, it’s entirely possible you’ll have to take a moment to remind yourself to leave all else behind and just move.





The Five-Row Rule


			People often believe that the safest place to sit in a plane is in the back—that may be true if the plane hits nose first. Some crashes are tail first, and in that case you obviously wouldn’t want to be in the back of the plane. To give yourself the best chances of survival in a crash or in an emergency landing, you want to maximize your chances of getting off the plane in time to escape smoke and fire. Sitting within five rows of an exit maximizes your chances of getting out of the plane alive. Even better than five rows from the exit? Obviously, the exit row itself. Booking an aisle seat is also preferable. The fewer people you have to deal with to get to an exit the better. The beauty of the Internet age is that when you book your flight online you get to choose your seat. So remember the five-row rule.





Plus Three, Minus Eight


			Plus three, minus eight refers to the essential first three minutes after the plane takes off, and last eight minutes of the flight until the plane lands. According to flight crash investigators, most crashes happen during those time periods. In order to increase your chances of survival during takeoff and landing:


Make it a point to be vigilant. Stay alert. In other words don’t immediately fall asleep before takeoff and make sure you’re awake before landing.

				Keep your shoes on. It’s also a good idea to think about traveling in comfortable, secure shoes (not sandals).

				Don’t let yourself be encumbered or distracted by devices or reading materials.

				If you drink, skip preflight cocktails; it’s not worth it.

				Make sure your seat belt is securely fastened.

				Note exits and your exact distance from them by counting seats.





Read the Safety Card


			If you’re like most people, you’re busy looking at your tablet or smartphone or reading the paper while the flight attendants are doing their safety checks. It’s easy to assume you know everything you need to know—you’ve heard the speech about how to fasten seat belts and what to do if the oxygen tanks come down many times before. However, it’s important to familiarize yourself with the safety card each time you fly. Planes are different, and as you now know, it’s essential to know where the exits are in an emergency situation. You also want to remind yourself what the brace position is, and to know how exactly your seat cushion would work if you needed to use it as a flotation device. I realize that only about 1 percent of you will actually read the safety card, but it takes only about two minutes to read over.


Pre-Takeoff Checklist

			 				Count number of seats from your row to the nearest exit.

				Take note of the surroundings. Are there any potential obstacles you’d have to deal with in an emergency?

				Keep your shoes on.

				Keep your seat belt tightly fastened.

				Read the emergency card.

				Check for your flotation device.

				Stay awake.





Taxis Are Not as Safe as You Think


			Most people who travel for pleasure or business get off the plane and into a taxi. It’s actually the taxi ride that is the more dangerous part of your journey. Many of us also feel safer taking a taxi back home or to our hotel after a night out on the town or we take taxis to avoid walking alone late at night. Whatever the reason you take a taxi, there are some crucial steps you must take to stay safe.

			In New York City, a taxi driver was recently sentenced to twenty years for raping a female passenger. A twenty-nine-year-old dozed off in the backseat of the taxi and woke up to find herself being assaulted by her driver. She was restrained, and held at knifepoint. In Kansas City, a woman says she was sexually assaulted and robbed by a taxi driver. She was intoxicated and opted to take a taxi home after going out to bars. A man posing as a cab driver tried to rape a woman in front of her three young children in Queens, New York. Authorities stated that there was nothing to indicate that the man was a licensed livery cab driver.

			Taxis are dangerous. When you get in a taxi you are putting yourself in a vulnerable position. You have no idea who you’ve just gotten into a car with, and you are trusting a total stranger with your safety and well-being. Foreign taxis can be especially dangerous. A young Australian woman survived a month of hiking in the Andes mountains in South America only to be shot by a taxi driver in a botched robbery. Elizabeth Littlewood and her boyfriend were on their way to the airport when they jumped into what they thought was a normal taxi. When the driver asked them for money in Spanish, the pair did not understand what he was saying. Elizabeth thought the driver wanted her to exit the taxi. She was shot in the stomach when she tried to open the door handle.





Don’t Fall for Taxi Scams


			I’ve outlined worst-case scenario situations for taxis, because I believe in being informed and safe. I also want you to enjoy family vacations and have successful business trips, so I also think you should be familiar with common scams that take place in taxis. In Las Vegas, “long hauling,” or taking tourists on the longest route possible, has become a serious problem. A Las Vegas taxi driver who has been driving for fourteen years spoke to the Las Vegas Review Journal, describing the problem as “truly epidemic” and explaining that taxi drivers were “coming up with more creative ways to take people on longer rides.” A state audit showed that nearly one in four passengers were taken on purposely longer rides than necessary. Luckily this is not a life-or-death situation, but you are still getting ripped off.

			A Washington, DC–area man recently pleaded guilty to a scheme in which he posed as a taxi driver, picked up young, intoxicated people and scammed them out of their money. Nyerere Mitchell convinced passengers to let him use their ATM cards to take out money for their fares. He would purposely use ATMs where the machine could be used only on the driver’s side. He’d use the passenger’s card, taking out much more money than the ride cost. Mitchell managed to steal more $200,000 from more than sixty DC residents.

			In New York City, thousands of taxi drivers overcharged passengers by putting the meter on “suburban rate” rather than the standard rate. This cost passengers an estimated $8.3 million in just two years. In one particularly extreme example, a cabbie picked up an eighteen-year-old college student at O’Hare airport in Chicago. The student was from China, and spoke little English. The cab driver told the student there were no buses available to take the student from O’Hare airport to Champaign, but that he would take him there for “the low price of $1,000.” Once the taxi arrived at Champaign, the driver demanded $4,800 from the student. While the student didn’t have that much cash, he handed over every penny he had to the taxi driver.





When a Taxi Is Your Only Option


			While there are many hardworking taxi drivers out there who aren’t out to rip you off or harm you in any way, it’s in your best interest to be informed and aware of situations in which someone can take advantage of you. Once again, I’ll remind you that situational awareness is key. You want to be aware of your surroundings, and you never want to get into a car with a stranger if you’re impaired in any way. If you have no other choice than to take a taxi to get to your destination, there are a few basic rules you should always follow.





Know Where You’re Going


			Familiarize yourself with the best route to your destination. Rather than depend on a stranger to get you from point A to point B, tell him exactly what route you’d like to take. Pay attention to where he’s driving, and know if he is veering off your preplanned route. Tell him immediately to return to the correct route. Get out of the car if he doesn’t comply with your instructions.





Do Your Research


			While it’s essential to stay alert regardless of where you travel, it can be helpful to know what kinds of scams take place in the particular country you are traveling to. For instance, in Buenos Aires, drivers have been known to give a “fake bill.” A driver will accept a tourist’s bill, then swap them for a counterfeit and tell the passenger they can’t accept their money. Travel bloggers warn tourists traveling to this area to pay in exact change and be alert when using Mex$100 and Mex$50 notes. In the Dominican Republic, there are reports of Americans getting into taxis without air-conditioning at the airport. The driver will roll down the window, and when the car stops at a traffic light, a motorcyclist will reach in and steal whatever they can get their hands on. It’s also helpful to know what is standard behavior when taking taxis when you travel. It’s perfectly acceptable to hail a taxi from the street in New York City, but that might not be the case in Taiwan. Research reputable taxi companies, and keep their phone number with you at all times. Also, when overseas, always ask the hotel you are staying at to call a taxi for you, and ask which cab companies you can trust.





Only You Decide Where You’re Going


			Do not allow a taxi driver (or anyone) to talk you out of going to your original destination. You never want to be in a situation where the driver has complete control—and you don’t know where you’re going. Do not allow a driver to suggest alternative hotels, restaurants, clubs, or bars, and never trust him if he’s “taking you on a shortcut” to save you money. It’s likely possible he’s working in conjunction with another person from the establishment—and recommending it for a fee. Deviating from your original plan also puts you in the dangerous position of not knowing where you are or if your taxi driver is going the right way.





Is It Legit?


			Before getting into a taxi it’s essential you check for a few simple things: (1) The doors should have handles on the inside. If there is no way for you to get out of the taxi on your own, do not get in. (2) Be sure there is a picture of the driver, the medallion is posted, and the taxi has a radio. If any of these items is missing, do not get in the taxi. (3) Make sure you’ve picked up the taxi at a legitimate taxi stand. Don’t take a ride from the guy who is standing against the wall in the airport saying, “You need a ride?”





Taxis Are Not for Sharing


			It might seem like a good idea to share a taxi with someone. You might think it will cut down on your waiting time at a busy airport or that it makes sense if you’re in a place where finding a taxi is difficult. Obviously, it’s also cheaper. Sharing a taxi with a stranger puts you in a vulnerable position. The person you are riding with might have an alternative agenda or could be working in conjunction with the driver.

			It’s become increasingly popular to use apps that provide customers with rides in private cars. According to the Daily Beast, there have been questions about whether such services keep the customer’s information private. Women have reported receiving text messages and messages via Facebook from drivers. Some women report that the only way drivers could have gotten in touch with them is if their driver was given their personal information when they booked the ride. Think twice about getting in a car that’s operated by a technology company and might not use the same background checks and undertake the same security measures as other taxi companies do.





Don’t Jump at Your First Option


			After a long trip, it’s natural to want to get away from the airport or train station and to your destination as quickly as possible. However, jumping in the first taxi you see is a big mistake and can really get your trip off on the wrong foot. Airports and busy train stations often attract unofficial taxis, and it’s best to stick with an area-licensed official taxi. Never opt for jumping in a taxi because the driver is available and you want to avoid a long line at a taxi stand. If it’s not immediately clear how to access a taxi from the airport, find the transportation desk and get instructions. It’s also a good idea to inquire about general prices or find out approximate costs in advance of your trip.





Windows Up


			It can be really tempting to open the windows and enjoy the breeze, especially when you’ve just started your vacation. When riding in taxis, the rule of thumb is, windows up—or just slightly cracked if absolutely necessary. Criminals are on the lookout for easy targets, and you don’t want to advertise that you’re an easy target by opening your window. Thieves can easily reach in and grab your belongings as the car slows or stops at a red light. Of course, you should never roll down your window if someone on the street gestures for you to do so.





Be Discreet


			Again, this goes back to situational awareness. Don’t spend your taxi ride sending texts on your smartphone. Smartphones are easy to steal and attract thieves. You’ll also want to think twice about wearing expensive jewelry or watches. I’m not saying you need to dress like a slob when you travel, just that you should be aware of displaying valuables that will tempt criminals.

			Drew avoided a potentially dangerous situation after taking my class. Drew was on the holiday of a lifetime with his wife and adult son and daughter. They were traveling to Scotland, England, Holland, and France. When they arrived at the Paris train station, Drew’s knowledge of travel safety and situational awareness came in very handy. He describes exiting the train station and encountering crazy crowds. It was not immediately clear where the taxi stands were located. Drew’s wife and daughter got separated from him in the crowd, and before he could catch up to them a man appeared asking his wife if she needed a cab. She said yes and further explained that they would need a large taxi, because they had lots of bags and were a large group. The man replied with a big smile that he had just the thing. Drew’s wife felt that she had had a stroke of good luck. The man grabbed her bag and started moving quickly out of the station. He urged his son and daughter to follow. Drew said his alertness level immediately went up. He felt this situation was too easy, too quick, and too lucky. He felt if it was too good to be true, it’s probably trouble. Drew decided to focus and get serious about what was happening. He chased them around a corner where he found his family being led to a large unmarked van. An imposing, unfriendly man was waiting at the van, and he told the family they should get in the van, and that he would load their bags for them. Drew checked for his tactical pen, and said firmly, “No. This doesn’t feel right, get our bags back now.” Drew’s son began to wrestle the bag back from the larger man. Drew started asking questions: “Where is your license? Where is your taxi light on the vehicle? Where is your meter?” The smaller man kept smiling, and tried to convince them they were a “special private taxi” and that the family should feel lucky they spotted them. Drew’s wife unfortunately did not share his sense of concern and didn’t want to drag the bags back to the long taxi line. Drew felt very strongly that this was not an official cab, and they were potentially entering into a very dangerous situation. Drew feels that his family really dodged a bullet, and at the very least they would have ended up a long way from their hotel with a huge bill. The real taxi line was thirty minutes long, and Drew had to pay for two taxis to fit his family and all of their belongings, but they ended up at their destination safely. Drew’s instincts were absolutely correct. This situation was full of red flags, and thanks to his knowledge of travel safety and good use of situational awareness, his family was able to continue enjoying their vacation safely.


				You’re Trapped in the Back of a Taxi and Need to Get Out. What Would You Do?

				First, I’d try to open the door to see if I could roll out at a stoplight. If the doors were locked, I’d have to kick open a window. To easily kick out a window you want to lie on your back. You’re going to use the force of both legs to break the glass at the lower right portion of the window—where it’s going to be easiest to break it. Keep your legs together, and start kicking that part of the window with both of your feet until the glass breaks. In this kind of situation, you’ve got to remember that the glass is tighter in the corners, so that’s where you’ll have a better chance of breaking it. If you kick the center of the window, your feet are going to bounce right off. To watch a video of me demonstrating this, visit SpySecretsBook.com.





Hotel Safety


			We’d all like to believe we’re safe when sleeping soundly in a hotel room, but that’s not necessarily the case. The boxer Mike Tyson woke up to rustling in his hotel room at the Cosmopolitan of Las Vegas. Luckily for the intruder, he escaped before Tyson realized what was actually happening. In Orlando, Florida, a woman was crying and screaming and pounding on the door of a hotel room at a Super 8. The men inside looked through the peephole, and saw the upset woman who they believed needed help. They opened the door, and several men entered the room and robbed the victims at gunpoint. During a string of robberies in an Orlando-area hotel district, a tourist was shot when returning from Walt Disney World. The tourist and his brother were pushed into their second story hotel room by the robbers. In Hyannis, Massachusetts, an elderly couple from Pennsylvania were robbed at knifepoint shortly after checking in to their hotel rooms. They were unlocking their room door when a man pushed it open and forced his way in. Mike McGowan, seventy-eight, ended up in a wrestling match with the robber. McGowan was flipped onto his stomach while the knife was held to him and his wallet was stolen.





Hotels and Fires


			Fires in hotels are also a cause for concern. Ten years after surviving the MGM Grand Hotel fire, the second worst hotel fire in American history, survivor Rafael Patino shared his story with the Los Angeles Times. On November 21, 1980, eighty-four people died and 679 were injured after the fire started with an electrical issue in a ground-floor restaurant. The blaze quickly spread due to the presence of combustible materials and a lack of fire sprinklers. Roy L. Parrish, the fire chief at the time, said that four minutes after the fire left the restaurant, it hit the lobby’s front doors and blew out all the glass. The fire was traveling at seventeen feet per second. Patino and his wife, who were at the hotel for a convention, were staying on the sixteenth floor. They realized their hotel was on fire only after looking out the window. There were no alarms or sprinklers to indicate that something was wrong. The Patinos left their room but were confronted by a wall of black smoke so thick that they briefly lost each other. Luckily, unlike many other guests who left their rooms, Mr. Patino had kept his room key and was able to get back in. The couple recalled their harrowing experience of stuffing towels under the door to stave off smoke, and hiding under a tent made out of curtains on their balcony. Glass was being blown out of windows, and they huddled on the balcony for more than two hours while waiting to be rescued. The Patinos were eventually rescued, but many others were not as lucky. The majority of the victims died between the nineteenth and twenty-fourth floors, where most of the smoke had risen through elevator shafts and air-conditioning ducts.

			Obviously, hotels are often a necessary part of travel—whether it’s for business or pleasure. I’m not suggesting that your family not take vacations due to the potential dangers of hotels or that you stop traveling for your job.

			I’ve been lucky enough to travel to places like France, Italy, Switzerland, Austria, and Greece. And I meet lots of wonderful people traveling across the country teaching my Spy Escape and Evasion classes. However, I always make a point to follow some very basic but important safety rules when staying in a hotel. I am also sure to have a few items with me to help ensure my safety.





How to Enjoy a Safe Hotel Stay


			Where to Book Your Room

			 				Stay between floors three and six. Criminals target the first two floors because they can quickly rob the rooms and then have quick access to a getaway car. You don’t want to stay higher than the sixth floor because in the United States a fire truck ladder will reach only to the sixth floor. If there’s a fire and you’re on the seventy-seventh floor, you’ve got a long way to get down.

				Do not stay near a stairwell. Criminals will often target rooms next to the stairwells since they provide easy access to escape.

				Practice situational awareness and make sure you are not followed off of the elevator. Should you ever suspect you are being followed off the elevator, do not enter your room. Call for help. Depending on the severity of the situation and what your gut tells you, you might call the front desk or the police.




Protect Yourself and Your Belongings

			 				Do not forget to use your lock. The second you walk into your room, lock the door.

				Use a door alarm stopper. This is a very inexpensive security item that can save your vacation—if not your life. Simply set the alarm in front of your door while you’re in your room, and it will be set off automatically if someone opens your door, resulting in an extremely loud noise.




Hotel Room Fire Protection

			 				Locate the exits. Before settling into your room, find the exits and note how many doors down the exits are. Note if you have to turn a corner, and which way you would have to go. You want to be able to locate the exits quickly even if you are unable to see.

				Consider investing in smoke hoods and gas masks. This is crucial if you need to travel to a third-world country. This is what executive protection agents carry with them when protecting people in certain overseas areas.

				Bring a hotel escape bag. This is a simple, light bag containing a few essential items that can save your life. A hotel escape bag usually contains about fifty feet of rope (about ten feet per floor), gloves for rope burn, and a carabiner that can support a weight of around thirteen hundred pounds. This is all you really need to get yourself safely out of a hotel room. In the event you needed to escape, you would clip your carabiner around a heavy piece of furniture (or around door hinges), and then use the rope to ease yourself to safety through a window.





Think Twice About Your Vacation Destination


			The last thing you want to do on vacation is worry about violent crime. Vacations are meant to be a time of fun and relaxation, so I highly recommend that you think carefully about booking vacations in certain areas. While it’s always important to familiarize yourself with areas you are traveling to, some places have simply become too dangerous for American travelers, in my opinion. These destinations include Mexico, which is currently the kidnapping capital of the world and also known for carjacking, highway robbery, and robbery by organized criminal groups, and the Caribbean—particularly Jamaica, which has one of the highest per capita murder rates in the world.

			While there are undeniably many wonderful places to visit in the Caribbean and Mexico, it’s really important that you understand the dangers of traveling to such places. Just because you are staying in a beautiful, well-run resort, doesn’t mean that the crime and poverty these countries are suffering from ceases to exist. Educate yourself about potential hazards when making travel plans, and as always, practice situational awareness at all times.