I believe knowledge is the most important tool of all. That being said, there are situations where some supplies and a few tools can save your life. The world is unpredictable, and I like to approach it prepared for anything. You don’t have to comb through history very far to see that being armed with some simple tools can make the difference between life and death. Crime, accidents, and natural disasters can instantly plunge us into danger.

			David and Yvonne Higgins were not planning to spend two days trapped in their SUV with their five-year-old daughter. The family was traveling from Texas to a ski resort in New Mexico when they were caught in the middle of a severe snowstorm. The family tried to follow in the tracks of a snowplow, but they soon lost visibility completely. The SUV fell down an embankment and was quickly buried completely by snow. Ms. Higgins described their situation as being “encased in a vehicle igloo.” All they could see or feel around them was snow. They huddled together in their ski gear and survived on water and snacks they had packed for the trip. Eventually the trio began to struggle for air. The Higgins family was lucky: They survived and were found in a dramatic search-and-rescue operation that began after Mr. Higgins was able to use his cell phone to contact his brother.

			In Atlanta, no one could have imagined that just a couple of inches of snow would render the city helpless. Commuters found themselves trapped in cars for three hours or more, and many ended up abandoning them on the side of the road. Children were trapped at schools when their parents were unable to navigate the massive traffic jams that were happening throughout the city. While in general, the situations I just described ended pretty well, there are times where being caught unprepared has tragic results.

			Debbie Este and her teenage daughters in Baton Rouge weren’t especially concerned about the coming hurricane. Ms. Este, who recounted her ordeal to CNN, basically expected wind and rain, and then the storm would blow over. They survived the storm unscathed, but after the levees broke, it quickly became clear that the family was in trouble. Within just a few minutes, the water was waist deep. Tiffany, sixteen, lost her cell phone while trying to save a hamster. Her mother rushed into her room to get her credit cards. They found one gallon of drinking water for four people (Ms. Este’s sixty-eight-year-old mother was also there). They managed to escape into the attic, which was miraculous, considering Ms. Este had been in a wheelchair for three years. The water made it all the way up to the fifth rung of the ladder that led to the attic. The next day, the water began to seep onto the attic floor, sending the family back into the corner of the dark, windowless space (it had one small air vent). The family had no food, no way to contact anyone, and a very limited water supply. Tragically, Ms. Este’s mother, who had suffered congestive heart failure, did not survive. The others were saved when Ms. Este’s brother arrived by boat. They were incredibly lucky. Many others lost their lives due to lack of preparedness during Hurricane Katrina, while others survived the storm but did not survive the aftermath.

			These stories illustrate an important point—you never know where or when you’re going to be faced with a life-or-death situation. Could you and your family survive in your house should you be trapped and unable to get food or water from outside sources? How long could you survive if something goes horribly wrong while you’re out for a drive? And while it’s easy to come up with countless examples of weather putting people in peril, there are many other dangerous situations that can occur at a moment’s notice.





The Three Tiers of Survival Gear: What an Ex-CIA Officer Really Carries Around


			People tend to have some unusual ideas about what intelligence officers carry around, and I wish the truth were half as interesting. People usually expect crazy gadgets—James Bond style, like watches with rotating saws, listening devices hidden in pens, or better yet, a rocket launcher that’s concealed inside of a cigarette. While I think my laptop bag has a few things the average person doesn’t carry around, it isn’t full of gold sovereigns and doesn’t launch a throwing knife if you hit the latch a certain way. I’ve never carried around a bottle of talcum powder that’s actually full of tear gas, either. The good news is that many of the items I personally carry are inexpensive, easy to transport, and may save your life. I’ve divided the gear I carry into three tiers so that you can easily decide what items would work best for you.





Tier One: Everyday Gear


			Everyday gear is what I carry on my body, typically in my pockets.


Pocketknife: I like to carry my pocketknife clipped onto the front of my pants pocket where I can access it easily. I usually carry a Benchmade knife, but there are a lot of solid knife makers these days. While a folding knife in your pocket or purse is a must-have item for self-defense and survival, hopefully you’ll end up using it only to cut open boxes and packages of hot dogs.

			Gun: I carry concealed every day wherever I legally can. Because I love guns you might find me carrying all types such as a Glock 19, Springfield 1911, or Sig Sauer P226 on my hip. I also often carry a Ruger LCP in my right front pocket. It’s obviously essential to have proper licensing and training, including training on safe operation and storage, before carrying a firearm. Gun ownership is a serious responsibility that should not be taken lightly.

			A cell phone: This is just common sense, as you need to be able to keep in touch. Again, I’m not a fan of smartphones or text messages. I think they interfere with situational awareness, plus it’s so easy to get your identity stolen from your smartphone. I believe cell phones are for phone calls. I don’t want to be caught off guard when reading a message on the street or while in my car—but I do want to be able to call 911 if needed, and you should too.

			Bobby pins: This may sound strange, but I’m going to show you how a simple, inexpensive bobby pin can get you out of some serious situations. I always make sure I have a bobby pin in my Escape & Evasion Gun Belt (CovertBelt.com). It’s light as a feather, and you’ll never notice it’s there.

			Monkey’s fist paracord keychain: Paracord (sometimes called 550 cord or parachute cord) has many amazing uses. It’s incredibly strong and can get you out of some serious jams, which we’ll talk about soon. The monkey fist is also a good self-defense tool because it’s paracord surrounding a ball bearing that can do some serious damage if you strike someone with it. You can get a free monkey’s fist keychain by visiting my website (SpyEscape.com).

			Handcuff key: I always keep a handcuff key on my keychain and in my Escape & Evasion Gun Belt. You never know when this might be useful, and it’s an item that’s allowed on flights, so you don’t have to worry about TSA trying to take it away.

			American dollars: Cash is king. While the American dollar isn’t worth as much as it used to be, I know some guys who have gotten out of some dicey situations thanks to a few twenties or a hundred dollar bill. If you’re traveling abroad, and you need to escape out of the back entrance of someone’s business—slipping him some cash is going to get you out. You never know when you’re going to need to grease someone’s palm, or desperately need a ride to some other location (normally I wouldn’t recommend getting in a car with a stranger—I’m talking about extreme circumstances), so just make a point of always carrying some cash with you.

			Tactical pen: The tactical pen is one of my all-time favorite self-defense tools and I’m never without one. The tactical pen is an appropriate tool for everyone and anyone. At first glance, it’s an actual pen. You can write with it, and it takes refillable ink from your local office supply store. When you’re not using it to make a list or to write a note, you can use it to stop an attacker. Thousands of people I’ve trained carry tactical pens, ranging from college students to government workers to overseas travelers. Tactical pens are made out of aircraft grade aluminum and have a strong pointed end. The pointed end could be used to stop an attacker and to break a car window if you’ve had an accident and need to get out before your car goes underwater. I also know from my training how much it hurts to get hit with a tactical pen. If you’re being attacked, a sharp jab with this pen in the eyes, kidney or groin is going to give you an opportunity to escape. I’ll go into more detail about how to use a tactical pen when we talk about self-defense, but if you want to see the one I use, visit TacticalSpyPen.com.

			Another reason I’m a big fan of the tactical pen is that you can take them anywhere. You’ll have no problem getting on a plane or into a courthouse with one (I took mine into the courthouse when going to pay a ticket). Recently, someone who took my course got in touch to let me know that he got his tactical pen through Ben Gurion Airport in Israel, which is considered the safest airport in the world. It’s also a great tool for runners. I like to run myself, and I know many people who feel very comfortable running with a tactical pen. You’d look scary running down the street with a knife in your hand—or a gun (which would be illegal)—but with a tactical pen, no one is going to think twice about it.

			Lock pick set: I always carry a lock pick set. I want to be prepared should I end up in a situation where I need to escape a locked room. Plus, it comes in handy for needing access to filing cabinets, locked drawers, or when your neighbors lock themselves out of the house and need your help. They’re also easy to get through TSA. In fact, 90 percent of the time I get my set through no problem; about 5 percent of the time a TSA employee will comment on my set, and tell me “it’s cool.” The other 5 percent of the time they inspect it and give it right back to me. To see the credit card lock pick set I use, visit SafeHomeGear.com. Also, while lock pick sets are legal in most states, be sure to check your state laws before you start carrying one.

			Credit card knife: The credit card knife is a great option for people who don’t feel comfortable clipping a knife to their clothing. I know many women who prefer a credit card knife to a regular knife. Just like it sounds, the credit card knife is an ingenious knife designed to fold up into the shape of a credit card for safe and easy transportation. The blade pops out of the center of the card, and each side folds back and clips into place. What starts out as a simple “credit card” in your wallet is suddenly a sharp knife that can defend your life or help out in a survival situation. To get a free credit card knife and to watch a video of how the knife works, visit SpyEscape.com.





Tier Two: Laptop Bag Gear or Purse Gear


			I’m a busy person. I write articles for various magazines, meet with clients, and teach a lot of classes. When I’m out and about, I have my laptop with me so that I can always get some work done. There are a few essential things I like to keep in my laptop bag along with my materials for work.


Bulletproof panel: Bulletproof panels can come in really handy and actually have a few uses. My bulletproof panel is level 3A, the same material that’s used for the bulletproof vests worn by police officers. Level 3A is the highest protection you can get to protect yourself from blunt trauma, and this is what you want in a high-risk situation. In the event there’s an active shooter, I’m going to be able to use the panel to protect my vital areas—and my life could be saved. I also use the panel when loading and unloading my gun. I’ll just put the muzzle of the gun against the panel, and then I know I have a safe backstop. It works great for dry fire practice as well, as an extra precaution. (You can see a video of my testing the bulletproof panel at Bulletproof Panel.com.)

			Spare ammunition: Obviously you need to know what’s legal to carry. Where it’s legal, I like to carry fifty rounds of ammunition in my laptop bag. The ammo I use is jacketed hollow point rounds, more specifically, Speer Gold Dot.

			Lock pick kit: As you know, I already have a credit card–size lock pick set, but some stuff I like to double up on. I always keep a full-size lock pick set in my laptop bag.

			Poncho: A poncho is fairly self-explanatory. You can use it if it rains, but you can also use it as an emergency shelter.

			QuikClot: I always carry QuikClot in my laptop bag, and have it around anytime I’m teaching a class that involves firearms. QuikClot is basically gauze that’s covered in a substance that accelerates the body’s natural clotting process. This is something I want to have around if I’m ever shot or stabbed or even if I get a nasty gash in a car accident.

			Flashlight: I think it’s really important to have a flashlight in an emergency or just a standard power outage. The one I carry is extra small and I call it the Spy Flashlight. You can get a free spy flashlight as a gift from me at SpyFlash light.com.

			Multi-tool: I like having a Leatherman multi-tool. It’s got a million and one uses thanks to the pliers, knives, screwdrivers, and other tools it has.

			Auto jiggler: When we start to talk about escape scenarios, you’ll understand why I think an auto jiggler is an important item to have. In the event you need to hotwire or commandeer a car in an emergency, this tool will help you get into an older model car. Remember slugs that could be used in vending machines? An auto jiggler is kind of like a slug key and is basically a lock-picking set for cars. They are used by locksmiths, auto dealers, and towing and repossession companies. You can use it to jiggle open the lock to cars made up until 1999. Also auto jigglers are perfectly legal to carry.

			Duct tape: Duct tape has thousands of uses and is a great thing to have around. You can use it to patch a hole in a tent or to attach things together to create a shelter. Duct tape is so sturdy and durable, that there are websites devoted to using it in crazy ways, like making wallets and even a hammock.

			Fire source: I don’t smoke, but I always carry a lighter. I want to be ready if I ever need to start a fire to keep myself warm or to cook some food.

			Paracord: Throughout this book you’re going to see how many amazing uses there are for paracord. I keep seven feet of it in my laptop bag. You’ll hear a lot more about how I use paracord later on.

			Voice recorder: Many phones can record something for you. I still like to carry around a voice recorder. If I’m doing business with someone I don’t trust 100 percent, I may go ahead and record the situation. If you want to do this, you need to know what the law says about recording conversations in the state you live in. A one-party state basically means you can record the call, if it’s two-party, you have to ask permission. It’s easy to find out the law of your particular state online.





Tier Three: Vehicle Gear


			Americans spend a lot of time in their cars. Believe it or not, the average American spends four and a third years in their cars and drives enough distance to travel to the moon and back three times. The average American spends a whopping thirty-eight hours a year stuck in traffic. For this reason, it’s critical you have some basic survival gear in your car with you at all times. The two items I think you need to have in your car are a toolbox and a seventy-two-hour kit. Both my wife and I have these items in each of our vehicles.


Toolbox: I keep some fairly specific items in the toolbox I keep in my vehicle:

			Ax: I keep a small ax in my toolbox. This can come in handy if you need to chop up some wood or cut through a tree blocking a road.

			Towrope: I’ve actually used this once to haul my cousin’s car, which was broken down. A towrope enables you to pull your car out of a tricky situation—and it’s also useful in the event you need rope to tie something together, such as securing cargo or making a shelter.

			Hand-crank radio: You don’t want to depend on your phone or your car radio for information in an emergency situation. A hand-crank radio enables you to know what’s going on at all times (since it’s a hand-crank, you don’t have to worry about batteries).

			Cigarette lighter: You already know I have a lighter in my laptop bag, but to be extra safe, I keep one in my car as well.

			Crowbar: A crowbar is useful in the event you need to smash out a window or break through a fence. It can also be used as a pry or a lever.

			First-aid kit: I have a simple first-aid kit you can get at most retail stores. You should be able to handle basic injuries and remember to keep QuikClot in there as well.

			Local map: If you ever have to leave town in a hurry, you need to be able to navigate local and back roads. You can’t depend on your GPS or cell phone in an emergency situation.

			Paracord: I like to keep at least twenty feet of paracord in my car at all times. You are probably starting to see that I think paracord is valuable because I have it in my car, in my laptop bag . . . pretty much everywhere.

			Knife: I keep a basic survival knife in my car. Yes, I still have one clipped to my pants pocket but it’s always a good idea to have more than one knife.

			Collapsible shovel: A collapsible shovel is a great thing to have in your car, and I’m a particular fan of the Glock E-tool. It’s not unlikely that you’ll find yourself in a situation where you just need to dig your tire out of snow or mud. Having this tool makes this fairly easy to do.

			Seventy-two-hour kit: A seventy-two-hour kit is an absolutely critical item for you to have in your car. Should you end up in an accident in an obscure area, your car breaks down, or you’re trapped in snow, the items in this small backpack can keep you alive. This kit contains three days’ worth of food and water. This pack is small; it’s not going to take up a lot of space in your car, and it’s just not something you can afford to go without. It’s easy to buy these packs premade or you can make one yourself. A good pack contains the following items:

			Food bars: You want at least six high-energy bars, about four hundred calories each. They should come wrapped in waterproof packaging.

			Six boxes of Aqua Blox: This is enough water to last three days. This emergency drinking water is Coast Guard approved and has a five-year shelf life.

			Water purification tablets: You should have at least ten purification tablets. Ten tablets will purify as many as five two-liter bottles of water. To use them simply drop them in the water, wait a few minutes, and the water is safe to drink.

			AM/FM radio: Make sure you also have batteries. The radio allows you to monitor the weather and other radio stations in the event of an emergency.

			LED flashlight: You want a flashlight that is rechargeable and won’t run out of power. Look for a flashlight you can recharge by simply squeezing the handle.

			Thirty-hour survival candle: This candle comes with an adjustable wick and can also be used as a small camp stove to heat food.

			Five-in-one emergency survival whistle: In addition to the whistle, the five-in-one has a signal mirror, compass, waterproof match container, and flint for starting fires.

			Waterproof matches: You want a box of waterproof matches in case your gear gets wet during an emergency.

			Emergency sleeping bag: The bag should be waterproof and windproof and retain 90 percent of your body heat.

			Emergency poncho: Get a poncho that includes a hood to protect your entire body from the elements.

			Survival knife: Some survival knives contain as many as sixteen different tools, including a Phillips-head screwdriver, can opener, corkscrew, reamer, manicure blade, sturdy reamer, hook disgorger, slot-screw driver, key ring, toothpick, fish scaler, tweezers, wood saw, cutting blade, and cap lifter.

			Respirator dust mask: You want a mask that is approved by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health.

			Pocket tissues: Have at least three packs of tissues.

			Safety goggles: To protect your eyes from debris during a disaster.

			Sewing kit: To use for sewing clothing or to repair tears in tents or other shelters. Make sure you have safety pins, needles, buttons, and thread.

			Twenty-four-piece hygiene kit: Consider having a toothbrush, toothpaste, Wetnaps for your hands, a bar of soap, shampoo and conditioner, dental floss pick, hand lotion, body lotion, deodorant, razor, comb, sanitary pads, shaving cream, and a washcloth.

			Small first-aid kit: You want to have bandages in different sizes, fabric strips, alcohol pads, and gauze pads.

			Deck of playing cards: For entertainment.

			Note pad and pencil: For writing down important information during an emergency.





Miscellaneous Items


			As you now know, I like to be prepared to deal with anything. In addition to the items I’ve already gone over in the Three Tiers of Survival Gear, there are a few other things I like to keep in my car. One of these is bolt cutters. If I ever need to cut through a chain link fence, or snap a padlock off of a fence, these are going to work. If you’re cutting through fences, you’re most likely in an extreme situation. If you haven’t figured it out already I also like to double up on certain items. I like to add extra rations of food and water pouches to what’s already in my seventy-two-hour kit.

			Remember, I’m not saying you need to run out and buy all of these items today. You should think about what items in the Three Tiers of Survival Gear would work best for you. But at the very least, start putting together your survival gear today.





Gathering Intelligence: Collecting Information to Stay Safe


			Now that you know which tools you’ll need to get through nearly any situation, I’m going to share some essential survival knowledge with you. In addition to preparing yourself for disasters by having food and water and other essentials, there are a few things you should do in advance to keep your family safe.

			Sally Gordon was spending Christmas in paradise with her family and friends in luxury villas in Patong, Thailand, back in 2004. Gordon was standing on the beach when she noticed a wave approaching. Not thinking there was anything to worry about, she ran into her villa to grab her camera. In a matter of seconds, a huge wave hit, and the entire villa was ripped away. Gordon was immediately caught up in the powerful current. The water pulled her body through buildings and smashed her against debris, and even pulled her under a floating car. Miraculously, she washed up about a mile inland. She lost several close friends that day in the tsunami that devastated Thailand (as well as India, Sri Lanka, Indonesia, and other countries). She was eventually reunited with her family. One of her sons was able to run about a mile inland and shimmied up a tree, her husband and another son scrambled to the top of the golf clubhouse, and her third son, who was directly hit by the wave, was saved by a fellow tourist who pulled him up a tree. Gordon and her family were incredibly fortunate to survive their ordeal. Of the 250,000 people who died in the tsunami, about 9,000 of them were tourists. Most of the stories about surviving the tsunami start off the same way—“we were in paradise,” or we were having a lovely time at the beach. No one could have imagined that such destruction could occur within mere minutes.





HUMINT Abroad: Human Sources Can Save You


			Obviously tsunamis are rare, and the tsunami of 2004 was one of the most extreme situations a tourist could encounter. That being said, thousands of tourists were stranded, hurt, and dependent on foreign governments for help while in a country that had just suffered a phenomenal disaster. The CIA uses the term HUMINT (short for human intelligence) to refer to any information that can be gathered from human sources. In other words, this is boots-on-the-ground intelligence gathering. I can’t stress enough how important it is to do some basic HUMINT when traveling to a foreign country. Before you leave home, spend some time online studying the country and making sure it’s safe enough for you to even visit in the first place. You should talk to people and ask where to find local hospitals, the American embassy, transportation, and escape routes. Should the country you are traveling in be hit with a major disaster like a tsunami, where could you go for medical help? How would you find your family members?

			While I’m cautious, I’ll admit it’s unlikely you’ll encounter something as terrible as Sally Gordon did while traveling. However, HUMINT research can simply mean the difference between staying safe and putting yourself at risk. When you’re abroad, make a point to note what’s typical and what’s not. What’s the baseline? What are locals wearing? How can you blend in? It’s crucial when traveling abroad to not stick out like a sore thumb—you don’t want to become a target, and then a victim. In addition to blending like a local, it’s a good idea to take note of the following when traveling abroad (or anywhere, really):


Pay close attention and be sure to follow any travel warnings issued regarding the country you are traveling to.

				Make sure you have the contact information for the nearest U.S. embassy or consulate.

				Note possible exit strategies should you have to flee during a natural disaster or civil unrest.





HUMINT at Home


			It’s also crucial you take the time to do some reconnaissance in the community where you live. If you’ve lived in the same place for a long period of time, it becomes very easy to stop paying attention to changes that are happening in your own area. You may remember a time when you’re driving with your spouse, and you ask, “Hey, when did that store show up?” You may be surprised when the response is “last year.” Whether you’ve lived in the same place your entire life or you’ve just moved to a new town, it’s essential you gather some intelligence about the place you live. Not too long ago I relocated from Virginia to Utah. One of the first things I did was gather intelligence about my new home. Make sure you know where to find all of the following. In the event of a major disaster, you may need immediate access to some or all of these places:


Exits and chokeholds: If you had to escape on foot or by car, which route would you take? Chokeholds are places where congestion or blockage is likely to occur. If you know where such places exist, you’ll be able to avoid them in an emergency.

			Hospitals: How far are you from the closest hospital? If that hospital were inaccessible, where would you go?

			Pharmacy: It’s important to know where you could purchase medications you might need if you or a family member is injured or becomes sick.

			Water sources: One of the first things I learned about my new community is that I live about a hundred yards from a river, and about three miles from a lake. Should there be an emergency, I could take one of the water filters I always have, grab a bucket, and gather drinking water for my family. In August 2014, officials in Toledo, Ohio, had to issue a warning to residents that they should not drink their water. The governor declared a state of emergency, and there was a run on bottled water in area stores. You never know when your water supply may be at risk. Knowing where you can access water is critical for your family’s survival in an emergency situation.

			The police department: Always know the exact location of your closest police department. This is where you would need to drive if someone was following you in a vehicle or you’re faced with any sort of emergency.

			Your local municipal airport: I highly recommend that everyone learn the location of your municipal airport. I paid a visit to mine when I moved to Utah. And for about $100, I was able to take a “discovery flight.” The discovery flight helps you see where you’d go if there was a serious emergency. It’s helpful to know where the hangar is and where the planes are stored. Most municipal airports also offer cool stuff like flight clubs and flying lessons. But the real reason you need to know about your municipal airport? In an extreme situation—I’m talking end-of-the-world style disaster—a municipal airport is going to give you your best chance at getting out of Dodge. In this situation you’d either pay someone (another reason to keep cash around), or hope someone would take pity on you and help you out. For this reason, it’s not a bad idea to get to know a pilot or two.





Food and Water: Build Your Supply


			I recommend keeping up to a year’s supply of food and water for yourself and your family. Not only will this keep you alive in an emergency but it will give you peace of mind knowing that if you suffer a job loss, you’ll be able to feed your family. Obviously not everyone will have the financial resources (or storage space) to keep this much, but the more you can keep, the better.


				Steps You Must Take Immediately If a Crisis Occurs

				In the event there is a major disaster—whether it’s a natural disaster, a riot, or any type of catastrophic occurrence—you must do whatever it takes to get out of the dangerous situation.

				 					Remember, movement saves lives, so get off the X. Moving and taking action significantly increases your chances of survival. It’s those who don’t move who are going to be killed.

					Quickly arm yourself. Ideally you’ll have had a chance to arm yourself with your knife or gun (at the very least I’m hoping your tactical pen was on you), but if the need arises, almost anything can be a weapon, including a rock, a shard of broken glass, or even a big stick.

					Get your gear if you can safely do so. Obviously having access to your seventy-two-hour kit is preferable. If you are able to get it, do so. If it’s putting you in greater danger to get it, you will have to leave it behind.





Water


			The recommended amount of water to have on hand is one gallon per person per day. Some people like to use fifty-five-gallon containers. I happen to like the seven-gallon reliance aquatainer. Obviously a gallon per person per day adds up quickly.


				How Much Cash Do You Recommend a Person Keep in the House for Emergencies?

				While some is better than none, I would make it your goal to keep at least $1,000 in cash, in twenties, in your home at all times. I’d keep more than that if you can. This will cover you for a while should some emergency arise that prevents you from getting access to cash from the bank. It will give you peace of mind to know that you can use cash to pay people to help you and your family escape in a crisis—or buy something you may need after a natural disaster or blackout.





Food Storage


			I realize most of us can’t go out and buy a year’s supply of food all at once. You can start to collect canned food and grains each month, and before you know it you’ll have a year’s supply of food (or whatever quantity works for you). I happen to be a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (Mormon), and I get my food from an LDS cannery. Anyone of any religion can buy food from the cannery, and they have the best prices around. There are currently 101 canneries where you can purchase items in bulk. If you can’t get to a cannery, you can purchase food online at ProvidentLiving.org. Again, remember that you do not have to be Mormon to purchase food at one of the canneries. They are open to everyone regardless of religious affiliation.