At an upscale Mexican restaurant in Manhattan, workers quickly hid when masked men, one in possession of a machete, robbed the restaurant. One customer at the bar remained completely oblivious to the robbery that was taking place, essentially right in front of him. While the robbers searched behind the bar for cash, this person not only continued to look at his phone, but raised his glass in a manner that indicated he’d like another drink. While he missed the entire robbery, he did actually move over to the next bar stool to make room for one of the robbers to escape. The man later told the detectives that he “did not know what had happened” and had been “staring at his phone the entire time.” Managing to miss a robbery that’s happening right around you shows an amazing lack of what’s known as situational awareness.

			People are often surprised when I tell them the most important thing I learned in the CIA is situational awareness. CIA officers receive the best possible self-defense training in how to ward off any kind of attack, how to escape restraints in seconds, and what to do in a car chase—but ultimately it’s situational awareness that’s going to keep an officer alive. We also know that it’s best to completely avoid any kind of violent confrontation. It’s our knowledge of situational awareness that allows us to act before a crisis occurs. If guns are drawn, it’s because we missed something, and our situational awareness was lacking.

			I’ve also experienced firsthand how important this skill is as a civilian. I met my wife while she was in law school in Baltimore. Her school was in a transitional area. While it wasn’t extremely dangerous, it was on the sketchy side, and someone had recently been stabbed on a bridge near the school. I didn’t want her walking around alone after night classes, and I always made a point of picking her up. But it turns out that we encountered trouble in broad daylight. It was a gorgeous fall day, so I decided to meet my wife and take her to lunch in Baltimore’s inner harbor. Right on the water, the inner harbor is full of shops and restaurants, and it’s one of the nicer spots the city has to offer. As we were walking to the inner harbor, I noticed a man behaving very suspiciously. He had crossed the street in front of us several times, and he was giving me a ton of eye contact, really staring me down. The man settled about two feet away from where I was standing. While my wife and I were waiting for the walk signal so that we could cross the street, he stood directly to my left. Because he was giving me so much eye contact, I was watching him in my peripheral vision, and paying a lot of attention to what he was doing. I made a point of watching his hands. It’s hands that kill—hands reach for knives or guns and throw punches. When the light turned, I purposely started taking small steps. I noticed that the guy was pacing me, walking step for step with me. At this point I had my tactical pen out. After about three steps, I turned to him and I said, “Excuse me, do you know what time it is?” He looked at me funny, and I said again, “Excuse me, do you know what time it is?” He responded, “Four-thirty.” We stared at each other for about a second, but it felt like an eternity. Suddenly he turned around and quickly walked away. He crossed the street and I never saw him again.

			By asking him what time it was, I accomplished two things. First, I had completely removed the element of surprise. My hands were up, so if necessary I could strike or disarm him. Secondly, I know that a normal reaction time is approximately one and a half seconds. That’s how long, at minimum, it takes a person to react to a situation. I knew that if he attacked, I’d need one and half seconds to do what was necessary to protect myself and my wife. The guy proceeded to tell me the time and immediately turned around and walked the other way (the fact that he then changed direction is a sure sign he was planning to do something). If this guy were innocent, he would have kept walking to the inner harbor like he was originally.

			Criminals don’t want their targets to know they’re onto them, but I knew. And by indicating to him that I knew what was going on, he made a choice to move on. Practicing situational awareness put me in a position to know that something was off. By being alert to my surroundings, I was able to identify that my wife and I were in harm’s way, and I was able to take action. While there are many ways this situation could have been defused, the important thing was that I did something. I trusted my gut and reacted. Had I been paying attention to my cell phone instead of what was happening around me, I would have ended up in an altercation with a mugger.





What Is Situational Awareness?


			If you take a look at what most people are doing on the street, at a playground, or a shopping mall, you’re going to see one common factor. The majority of people are either talking on their phones, or sending and reading text messages. If you are looking at your phone, you have your head down, you’re disengaged, and you likely have no idea what’s actually going on around you. Or maybe you’re not talking on your cell phone, but you’re preoccupied by work, stress, or just daydreaming about an upcoming vacation. The bottom line is that if you’re not alert and aware, you are vulnerable. There are many situations in which injury (or worse) could have been avoided if people were practicing situational awareness. In San Francisco, there was a rash of cell phone users being assaulted and robbed in public. A forty-three-year-old man was punched and robbed while texting in broad daylight on a crowded street corner. An up-and-coming comedian in New York fell onto the subway tracks while texting and was struck by a train. Miraculously she survived. A fifteen-year-old girl in the San Diego area was less fortunate. She was standing on a street corner texting when she attempted to cross against the light. Her brother tried to stop her, but he was too late. She stepped into the path of an oncoming truck and was killed. Had any of these individuals been paying attention to their immediate surroundings, these tragic situations would have been avoided.


				Smartphones and Situational Awareness

				I realize this might sound weird, but I’ve never sent a text message in my entire life, and I have no plans to. While smartphones may have some great features, I think they are terrible for situational awareness. How many times have you been stopped at a green light and the guy in front of you was too busy texting to notice the light was now green? The bottom line is that none of my training as a CIA officer is going to help me if I’m too busy texting to notice I’m in danger. There are other reasons I stick to a flip phone—smartphones store too much personal information, and they can suck up too much time—but the main reason is that smartphones are simply a threat to my situational awareness.





The Most Important Colors: White, Yellow, Orange, and Red


			At its most basic, situational awareness is about remaining alert and knowing what’s going on around you. It’s really about being able to assess your environment, anticipating danger, and being ready to take any further action if necessary. What I recommend following, and what I teach in my Spy Escape and Evasion courses, are the Cooper Color Codes. These are four stages of readiness that enable a person to be in a mind-set to react appropriately and quickly to a threat.

			Jeff Cooper was a Marine who served in the Pacific on the USS Pennsylvania during World War II. Cooper returned to active duty during the Korean War, where he was promoted to lieutenant colonel. In the 1970s, Cooper founded the American Pistol Institute in Arizona, where he taught handgun and rifle classes to civilians as well as law enforcement and military personnel. While Cooper was known for his handgun and firearm expertise, he also believed that actual weapons or self-defense skills did not provide the best way to survive a potentially fatal attack. Cooper believed that the most effective tool was a person’s mind-set. Cooper’s Color Codes are used to describe different degrees of situational awareness, as follows:


Condition White: Unprepared and totally unaware. The individuals I described earlier in this chapter would have been operating under Condition White. It is crucial that you learn to avoid this condition at all times.

			What it looks like: Head down, eyes averted, oblivious to what’s going on around you. A person in Condition White may be daydreaming, talking on a cell phone, texting, or engaged in a conversation. If you’re in Condition White you may be sitting on a bench reading or you might walk into a dark alleyway at night without thinking twice about it, putting yourself in a position where you could easily be attacked. If you aren’t alert to what’s happening in your immediate environment, you are vulnerable and unprepared for whatever might happen next.

			Condition Yellow: Relaxed alert. When you are in Condition Yellow, there’s no specific threat, but you remain alert and aware. Condition Yellow isn’t about expecting an attack but about allowing yourself to be constantly taking in information about what’s going on around you. People functioning in Condition Yellow are difficult to surprise. This is how most people operated before cell phones.

			What it looks like: Your head is up, you’re aware of your surroundings. You may be having a conversation, but aren’t so distracted that you wouldn’t notice a car coming your way, or a person heading toward you with intent to attack. A person in Condition Yellow would definitely notice a strange person approaching him on the street, and would have ample time to decide how to respond—by crossing the street, changing direction, calling for help, and so on. Condition Yellow allows you to notice if trouble is coming your way. It’s important to remember that staying in condition yellow keeps you out of Condition Red, which I’ll get to in a minute. Being in Condition Yellow while walking with my wife in Baltimore City is what kept us from getting mugged, and it can help you stay safe too.

			Condition Orange: A state in which there is a specific alert. You may notice a man in a thick winter coat walking around a crowded building in the middle of August. You may be walking to the parking lot when you notice someone paying too much attention to you. Something about a situation or an individual feels potentially threatening. You prepare yourself by putting your hand on your tactical pen or you get out your cell phone to call for help.

			What it looks like: I immediately went into Condition Orange when my wife and I were standing on the street next to the person I believed was going to harm us. I was in Condition Yellow (aware) when I noticed something off about this particular person. Once in Condition Orange, I got out my tactical pen. (I always carry a gun where I legally can, but I don’t have a concealed carry permit for the state of Maryland. I’ll get to the benefits of carrying a tactical pen shortly.) I remained alert and was ready to deflect an attack. If you feel a person is following you, turning around and walking into a crowded store is another example of a Condition Orange response.

			Condition Red: Condition Red is the crisis condition, but you are mentally prepared to fight or escape. You’ve predetermined what exactly was going to cause you to react, and you’ve now received that specific trigger from the criminal. You got out your tactical pen while you were still in Condition Orange, but now you’re striking your attacker with it, fighting for your life. While it’s entirely possible the situation may involve fighting or using a weapon or any self-defense tactics you have, it’s also possible the situation will be resolved by other means such as calling 911 or running into a well-populated area.

			What it looks like: A person is responding to a real threat. She has predetermined that this threat is likely to occur, and has not been taken by complete surprise. This individual in Condition Red may have already noted an escape and is running to it, has decided to thwart off the attacker, may have drawn a knife or other weapon, or may be calling for help.





Stay in Yellow to Avoid Red


			Heather, who is a graduate of my Spy Escape and Evasion course, avoided a carjacking because she was practicing good situational awareness. “When I’m at the gas station, I always remember what I learned in Jason’s class,” she reports. “Keep your keys in your hand, not your phone, and be aware of what’s going on around you. I was nearly finished pumping gas when I saw a man running up to me on my right side. He seemed to be coming out of the woods behind the gas station. He was shouting, ‘Excuse me!’ very loudly, trying to get my attention. I also noticed there was a second man approaching. My gut told me something was very wrong, and I was glad I had my tactical pen on me. I screamed at him and told him to back off. I put the pump down, and drove off. They both lunged toward my car. I was convinced they wanted the car—and if they had the car, they had me too.”

			Because Heather was operating in Condition Yellow, she was able to immediately determine that this person wanted to do her harm. She was able to see right away that the potential carjacker was working with someone else. She was aware, and therefore did not fall for the criminals’ plan to distract her while the other person came up to her from behind. Had Heather allowed herself to be distracted by the first man, she could have lost her car, or worse, her life.

			While making an effort to operate on Condition Yellow takes some getting used to, it’s a simple change that could ultimately save your life. Choosing to put away the cell phone and walk down the street with your head up is a big start, but you’ll also want to sharpen your senses. Your gut will often tell you when something is wrong, and it’s important to listen, but there are some additional strategies that can help you be more aware if danger is looming.





Get Off the X: The Most Important Thing to Remember in Any Emergency


			In addition to practicing good situational awareness, it is critical you remember the one simple concept that can keep you from being injured or worse. In the event you are faced with a life-and-death situation of any kind, you need to move. I’ll be referring to this frequently throughout the book, when I say, “Get off the X.” You’ll see in the stories I tell that people who move live. It’s freezing and staying put that will get you injured or even killed. If someone is headed directly at you with a knife, getting off the X and moving will prevent you from being stabbed. Similarly, leaving town in time to avoid a major storm is getting off the X. It’s essential that you remember that movement saves lives.





It Did Not Come Out of Nowhere: Recognizing Pre-Incident Indicators


			Many victims will tell you they had no idea they were about to be attacked. The truth is, there are clear-cut signs most criminals exhibit before attacking someone. When my wife and I were headed to our lunch in Baltimore, you’ll remember I noticed the man was giving me intense eye contact and matched our pacing. These are known as pre-incident indicators. Pre-incident indicators can be described as predictable patterns of behavior that a person will exhibit in a particular situation. There are several recognizable pre-incident indicators that can alert you to potential criminal behavior.





Pre-Incident Indicator 1: Staring


			Criminals will stare at you for an uncomfortable period of time if they’ve targeted you for an attack. If you notice a person staring at you for an unnaturally long period of time, cross the street, ask for help, or do whatever it takes to get out of their way. The reason they stare at you is because they’ve locked eyes on their target, and that target is you. The criminal has made the decision to go after you, and when a predator finds his prey he keeps his eyes on it.





Pre-Incident Indicator 2: Pacing


			Only people with ill intent will match your pacing. It is not natural for humans to want to walk in step with strangers, so be aware when someone is matching your pace. This is also true in vehicles. If you and another vehicle are driving side by side on the highway, one car will speed up or slow down. You will notice that if you vary your speed, the criminal will walk slower or faster to match your stride. This indicates that you need to get away from this person and to safety as quickly as possible.





Pre-Incident Indicator 3: Distraction


			Heather from my Spy Escape and Evasion class did not allow herself to be distracted by a man coming at her shouting, “Excuse me!” She saw his ploy for what it was—a distraction. Criminals will often work in pairs or groups, with one person distracting the victim with a question, plea for help, or even an offer of help if you appear lost or are obviously a stranger to an area. Once you are distracted, the other criminal will have a perfect opening to steal your purse, wallet, or phone, or worse.





Beating Normalcy Bias: Knowing That It Can Happen to You


			To this day, Penelope regrets getting on the subway during the September 11 attacks. “I lived right on the water, and had a perfect view of the twin towers. I walked out of my apartment building in Brooklyn and saw flames and smoke pouring out of a hole in one of the towers. Obviously something horrible had happened. Lots of people were gathering around and watching. Someone said a small plane had crashed into the towers. I was immediately comforted by this. It made sense.” Even though she was shaken by what she saw, Penelope decided it was probably an accident, so she got on the subway and continued to work as normal. It was when she was on the subway that it became clear that something terrible was going on, and that she had put herself in a very unsafe position. “There was an announcement that a second plane had hit the World Trade Center. I immediately knew something big was happening and I was very scared. I didn’t know what was going on, but it seemed like a good idea to get off the subway and walk away from the towers immediately.” Penelope was fortunate that she was not directly in harm’s way as so many other people were that day, but she likely would have made different choices had she not be impacted by what’s known as normalcy bias.

			Normalcy bias is how humans cope with unwanted change. It’s a way of processing traumatic events or disasters. Humans are wired to fear change. When a big event is about to take place or is taking place, such as a hurricane, terrorist attack, or an outbreak of an illness, it’s natural for us to try to normalize the situation to the best of our ability. As Penelope puts it, “In a million years I never would have assumed we were being attacked by terrorists. A terrorist attack just wasn’t in my realm of possibility. My brain simply did not process this.”

			While normalcy bias is a protective mechanism, it’s something we must learn to combat and be aware of to stay safe. It’s normalcy bias that allows us to think that we’re going to be OK, or an approaching storm isn’t going to be that bad. This is how normalcy bias puts us in danger. If we aren’t aware of the impact a particular event may have, we’re not able to adequately prepare for it. Left unchecked, normalcy bias can lead us into dangerous behaviors, such as these:


Not taking a disaster seriously: If you don’t recognize how deadly a storm or potential terrorist attack can be, you will not be prepared when such an event occurs. You may do something that puts you at further risk. For instance, Penelope would have been safer staying home than riding the subway into lower Manhattan. Had she taken the situation more seriously, she would have been aware that going into Manhattan was risky.


Not preparing for a disaster: We’ve all seen how crowded Home Depot gets the night before a big snowstorm. People are out buying shovels, salt, or whatever is needed. The same could be said for other disasters. In certain parts of the country, people routinely experience hurricanes or wildfires. Yet, not all of these people will prepare properly by planning escape routes and having supplies and food on hand. Normalcy bias keeps people from planning appropriately. They may think, “The fire will never reach this far, so I don’t need to prepare.” Or “I’ll be rescued if there’s ever a real problem.”


Believing that because something hasn’t happened before, it never will: It’s hard to know how to react when dealing with a new experience. People who are hindered by normalcy bias tend to stay positive and not acknowledge that just because something hasn’t happened before, doesn’t mean it can’t. As we’ve seen in just the past few years, terrorist attacks, hurricanes, tornados, and blizzards do happen—and not always when and where you’d expect. While I’m not suggesting you spend all of your time worrying about every situation that could possibly happen, it is important to not let normalcy bias get in the way of your being a prepared individual. Normalcy bias isn’t just about being prepared for a storm or other disaster. It’s really a state of mind that you have to learn to manage in order to practice good situational awareness.





I Didn’t Know, I Saw: Secrets to Establishing a Baseline


			How do you determine whether a seemingly normal situation is starting to turn dangerous? How can you pick up subtle cues that something is off—that a situation isn’t quite what it seems? Establishing a baseline is key to knowing whether a situation is potentially dangerous. Establishing a baseline requires that you note significant or subtle changes occurring in a particular place or in a person’s behavior. The BBC’s modern take on the character Sherlock Holmes presents one of the best (but extreme) examples of a person who can quickly and accurately gather information about a person. When Sherlock meets Watson for the first time, he casually asks him “Iraq or Afghanistan?” Based on Watson’s answer (Afghanistan) and spending literally only a few seconds with him, Sherlock is able to determine that Watson is an injured war doctor, that Watson sees a therapist, and that his therapist believes his limp is psychosomatic. Watson quite naturally is stunned by Sherlock’s accuracy. When Watson asks Sherlock how he knew, Sherlock replies, “I didn’t know, I saw.”

			He goes on to explain, “Your haircut, the way you hold yourself, says military. The conversation as you entered the room said trained at Bart’s, so army doctor. Obvious. Your face is tanned, but no tan above the wrists—you’ve been abroad but not sunbathing. The limp’s really bad when you walk, but you don’t ask for a chair when you stand, like you’ve forgotten about it, so it’s at least partly psychosomatic. That suggests the original circumstances of the injury were probably traumatic—wounded in action, then. Wounded in action, suntan—Afghanistan or Iraq.”





What Exactly Is a Baseline?


			You can be operating on Condition Yellow, aware of what’s happening around you, but if your brain isn’t allowing you to see, or register and react to, what’s normal or not normal, you won’t be able to take appropriate measures to stay safe. To determine what is normal—whether it be for a particular person or a place, you need to take a baseline. A baseline is an informal measure that determines what is normal and what is not. A close friend who tells you, “Hey, you’re looking really good these days” is able to make that comparison because he knows what you look like on a day-to-day basis—he knows your baseline. He’ll be able to notice if you’ve gotten some sun or are looking especially well rested. If a child who usually has a robust appetite suddenly isn’t hungry at dinner, you may think something is off. She may be getting sick, or maybe she just had too many after-school snacks. Of course, for another child this might be normal—and if he started eating much more than he usually does, you would think something was amiss. These are very basic examples of everyday baselines, circumstances in which someone is aware of what is typical and what isn’t in a given situation. It’s important to note that these are not universal norms; rather they are specific to our situation and surroundings.





Places Have Baselines Too


			As you may expect, almost all major government buildings have fence lines with cameras and alarms that go off in some type of operations center. Cameras now play a critical role in maintaining a facility’s security by establishing the baseline for the actual building. The camera’s sensors pick up bits of information and are able to determine what is normal on the fence line on an average day. If something out of the ordinary occurs, like a deer or a person approaches the fence line, the operations center would immediately be notified. The cameras know the baseline; the cameras know when something different happens. In a similar way, you can make a point of knowing when something is off of your baseline. Would you know immediately upon arriving home if something was different? Would you be able to tell if a potentially dangerous event was occurring near your office? Establishing a baseline of your home, your immediate surroundings, and places you frequent can save your life.

			Marie knew immediately that something was wrong when she opened the door to her apartment. “A plant on the desk had been knocked over. I knew I hadn’t knocked over that plant.” Marie immediately noticed a few other things that were off. “We had a container in the living room that held our change. It was tipped on its side. I also saw that the window was open. I was positive the window was closed when I left in the morning.” Marie knew the baseline of her apartment. She made a point of closing the windows every time she left the building, and was positive the plant and change were out of place. Her awareness of what was normal for her apartment was off. She knew someone had been in the apartment and she immediately called the police. Unfortunately, not everyone is in tune with his or her baseline as Marie. An Orlando, Florida, woman was lucky to remain physically unharmed after two separate robberies. Lisa Bailey and her son Ryan returned home to find their garage door open. Ryan believed he had left the garage door open before leaving for school that day. The family walked into the house to discover their computer and television were missing, the cabinets and drawers were all open, and food was even removed from the refrigerator. In a later incident, the family came home to find a black Jeep with a crying toddler in the backseat parked in their driveway. Rather than call the police, Ms. Bailey walked in on burglars. The criminals were climbing out the back window as she was entering her home. This family is incredibly fortunate that despite their failure to notice that their baseline was off, they were not hurt or even killed by the burglars.





Know Your Norm—And Keep It Consistent


			To stay safe, it’s important to familiarize yourself with baselines. By establishing a baseline for your home and other places you frequent, you will be able to sense immediately when something isn’t right. Marie knew right away that someone had been in her home, because she knew and maintained a baseline. It’s crucial to have a solid, preplanned security routine in place. Make sure this is followed every time you leave the house. While the specifics of your security routine must reflect the needs of your family and home, be sure to include the following in your routine:


Lock all doors.

				Close and lock all windows.

				Shut and lock the garage.

				Turn on/off exterior lighting.



			You should also be sure you and your family members are aware of other procedures. Do you shut all blinds or curtains before going out? Were lights left on? If your family discusses normal procedures before leaving the house, each member of your family will immediately be able to determine if the baseline is off. Remember, if you ever think someone is in your home, do not attempt to enter. The risk to your own safety is not worth it. Call the police.





What Does Experience Tell You?


			Just like you should know if something is wrong with the baseline of your home, you should also be able to tell if something is off when shopping, going to work, or you’re at your child’s school. It’s not unusual to be watching the news or reading an article where someone says, “I knew something was wrong.” People who are in tune with the baseline of their surroundings are able to pick up on the sometimes subtle (but not always) clues that something is wrong. These people not only understand what a baseline should look like but they’re also not letting normalcy bias get in the way. Erin Sarris, a runner who survived the Boston Marathon bombing knew something was wrong. “I didn’t know what it was, but I knew it wasn’t thunder, because it was a beautiful day with just some high, puffy clouds.” Sarris got out her cell phone immediately, connected with her husband and got out of the area. She soon saw lots of ambulances approaching and her suspicions were confirmed. Sarris knew that a loud noise that was not related to the weather signaled a potentially dangerous situation. Katherine Walton, a thirty-nine-year-old American, was shopping at a mall in Nairobi with her five children when a brutal terrorist attack occurred. She recalled hearing “very loud explosions” and immediately knew something was wrong. She was able to hide with three of her children, and texted the other two to stay hidden until the danger had passed. In both of these cases, the women reacted. They did not wait to see what was going on, or make the assumption that even though they had heard something highly unusual, that things must be OK. They did not let normalcy bias get in the way. To determine whether a situation may potentially be dangerous, ask yourself the following key question:


Based on what I know from past experience, does everything appear as it should?

			If a situation appears different from what you know to be normal, you need to consider the possibility that something might be wrong. Reacting when your experience tells you “that wasn’t normal” can save your life.





It Starts with Standard Human Behavior


			While we can’t all have Sherlock Holmes’s powers of deduction, we can learn something from his unusual abilities to make determinations about a person. I’m not suggesting you should be able to figure out where a person lives and works just by looking at him, but knowing how to use small details to learn about a person or situation is important. While we’re taught to appreciate each other’s differences, we all know that there is a range of behavior that is believed to be acceptable. Behavior can fall anywhere on the spectrum from common to unusual to unacceptable. Human behavior is also influenced by a variety of other factors such as culture, values, and attitudes. What may be viewed as acceptable in one place may be unacceptable in another. It may be perfectly appropriate to wear a suit and tie to work at a law firm, but it would seem extremely strange to show up in a suit if you were a construction worker. It’s appropriate to shout and yell at a sporting event, but inappropriate at a play. While standard human behavior may change depending on where the behavior takes place, we all know in our gut if someone’s behavior is out of the ordinary and we need to proceed with caution.

			Roxanna Ramirez, a twenty-two-year-old Target employee, is credited with saving a seven-year-old child who had been abducted in Pittsburg, California. Ramirez noticed a shopper behaving strangely. “He was fidgeting around, acting really weird, like abnormal. It just didn’t make me feel comfortable,” she recalled. Ramirez watched the man, and even approached him to ask if he needed any help. She continued to watch him after he left the store, and saw that he continued to behave strangely in his car. Ramirez decided to call the police. Forty-five minutes later the police had a forty-three-year-old man in custody, and Natalie Calvo of Antioch, California, was safe. Clearly Ramirez had observed the man exhibiting something other than standard human behavior. She described him as fidgety and called his behavior weird. In her gut, she knew something was wrong. Because Ramirez was observant and took action, a little girl was saved from a kidnapper. I’m not suggesting you call the police every time you encounter a person who is a bit out of the ordinary, but it’s crucial to be aware of what is and is not considered standard human behavior. A few things to consider are the following:


Is a person dressed inappropriately for the weather? Wearing a winter coat even though it’s warm?

				Is the person displaying odd gestures or mannerisms?

				Is the person somewhere he or she isn’t supposed to be?

				Is the individual paying too close attention to you or someone else?

				Does the person appear to be following someone?

				Is the person looking around nervously? In other words, is his or her head on a swivel?





Don’t Give Criminals the Opportunity


			Criminals are often interviewed in prison, shown pictures of people on the street, and asked which ones they’d target. After reading this chapter, it should be no surprise that the victims the criminals chose were the ones operating in Condition White—heads down, talking on the phone, not aware of their surroundings. We only have to look out on the street to know that 99 percent of people have their heads buried in their smartphones. Rarely do we see a person actively paying attention to his surroundings. The good news is that if you practice the tactics we just discussed, and you walk confidently in Condition Yellow with your head up and hands empty, there’s little chance that you will become a criminal’s next victim, because the criminal will choose an easier target—someone who’s not paying attention.