Primary School National Chess Championship Charlotte, North Carolina May 5, 1985.

Last round. Board one. Winner takes the title. My opponent and I were set up on a solitary table in front of an unmanned camera that would relay the position to press, coaches, and anxiety-ridden parents in the hotel lobby. The rest of the competitors, over five hundred of the country’s top young chess players who had come to battle for the National Championships, faced off on long rows of chessboards filling up the rest of the tense playing hall. The top board is a throne or a prison, depending on how you look at it. Everyone dreams of getting there, but then you arrive and find yourself all alone, trapped on a pedestal with a bull’s-eye on your forehead. Entering the tournament, I was the man to beat. I knew teams had been gunning for me, spending months of preparation on treacherous opening traps designed specifically to catch me off guard. But I had already rolled over my first six opponents, giving up only one draw. I felt unbeatable when matched up against kids my age. They couldn’t touch me.

Little did I know that my opponent was a well-armed genius. His name was David Arnett. At three years old he had memorized the New York City subway map. At five he was doing high school math. At six he was the top first-grader in the country and the best chess player at the prestigious Dalton School, which was coached by Svetozar Jovanovic, a legend in scholastic chess who had taught many young champions. Jovanovic had given David a classical chess education and a sense for competitive discipline to rival my own. Soon after this game, Dave and I would become best friends. But right now he was just a buck-toothed little blond kid who looked petrified.

On the third move of the game, David made a strange decision, allowing me to capture his king pawn with my knight. I should have taken some time to look for traps, but I moved too quickly. Then he was all over me, bringing his queen into a dangerous attacking position, chasing my overextended knight who had nowhere safe to hide. I’d been stupid to grab the pawn. Now this smart little kid was going after my king and I was fighting for my life.

I can see my eight-year-old self as the game slipped away, sitting at the board, sweat beginning to flow, goose bumps rising, my heart picking up speed, hungry stares of envious rivals sitting at nearby chessboards, the eerie rustling silence of the playing hall, the fragility of so many dreams. I wasn’t a superman. I was a child who slept in my parents’ bedroom because of terrible nightmares, now competing with the world on my shoulders and everything falling apart.

I had a choice of completely self-destructing or losing some material, regrouping, and then trying to fight back. I’d done this countless times at Washington Square Park. But being on the ropes against a kid was new to me. I had dealt with the pressures of being the favorite at the Nationals by puffing myself up with a sense of invincibility. Confidence is critical for a great competitor, but overconfidence is brittle. We are too smart for ourselves in such moments. We sense our mortality like a cancer beneath the bravado, and when things start to go out of control, there is little real resilience to fall back on.

When the game was over I was stunned, reeling from being so close to winning my first national championship and then letting it go, self-destructing, falling apart. Was I a loser? Had I let my parents down? What about the guys in the park, Bruce, my friends at school? How could I have lost? One of the problems with being too high is that there is a long way to fall. Had I fallen in my own eyes or also in the eyes of those around me? After trying so hard, was there worth outside of winning? An eight-year-old is hardly prepared to deal with such loaded issues, and I was very fortunate to have a family with the ability to keep, or at least regain, a bit of perspective in times of extreme intensity. We went fishing.

* * *

The ocean has been a huge part of my life since the womb. Literally. When my mother was five months pregnant, we were at sea, trolling for blue marlin in ten-foot Gulf Stream rollers. Some of my earliest memories are from the dock of my family’s little house on mosquito-ridden South Bimini Island, fishing for snappers, feeding moray eels, swatting away bugs at night while chumming for sharks.

Growing up, I knew that come summertime, we would head off to sea no matter what else was happening in our lives, what crisis was looming, what tournaments I was missing, how out of context or absurd our ocean trips might have felt at the moment of departure. I have come to understand that these little breaks from the competitive intensity of my life have been and still are an integral part of my success. Times at sea are periods of renewal, coming together with family, being with nature, putting things back in perspective. I am able to let my conscious mind move away from my training, and to gain creative new angles on the next steps of my growth. These trips are a far cry from luxurious vacations—actually they are nonstop manual labor, sweating in the engine room trying to coax an old generator back to life, working the cockpit in the hot sun, keeping the boat together in angry squalls, navigating through big seas, living right on the edge.

The boating life has also been a wonderful training ground for performance psychology. Living on the water requires constant presence, and the release of control. A boat is always moving with the sea, lurching beneath your feet, and the only way to survive is to sink into rhythm with the waves and be ready for anything. I learned at sea that virtually all situations can be handled as long as presence of mind is maintained. On the other hand, if you lose your calm when crisis hits seventy miles from land, or while swimming with big sharks, there is no safety net to catch you.

There have been many years when leaving my New York life felt like career suicide—my chess rivals were taking lessons and competing in every weekend tournament while I was on a boat crashing through big waves. But I would come back with new ideas and a full tank of energy and determination. The ocean has always healed me, brought me back to life when I have needed it . . . and as an eight-year-old child in the midst of an existential crisis, I needed it.

My parents, baby sister, and I left Fort Lauderdale on the Ebb Tide, our twenty-four-foot Black Fin, a wonderful old fishing boat that carried us through many summer adventures in high seas until she blew up and sank when I was twelve. Fifty-seven miles east southeast was Bimini, an island that was like home to me. I can still see her coming into sight through my childhood eyes, those hazy first trees like a miracle after a long ocean crossing. We didn’t talk about chess for weeks. We fished, dove in warm crystal-clear water, trolled the Gulf Stream, breathed in the beautiful southern air. I rediscovered myself as a child, ran around the island with my friends Kier and Kino, passed countless hours with my head hanging off our rickety old dock, hand line dangling in the water, watching the fish dart around. On rainy evenings, my mom and I would take our dog Brownie and go into the jungle, hunting for giant land crab. My family reconnected as human beings, outside of the mad swirl of scholastic chess. I was devastated, but slowly my parents revived my boyish enthusiasm for life.

In painful times, my mom has always been an anchor, holding everything together until the clouds roll by. When I was a child, she would press her soft cheek against mine, reminding me that I didn’t always have to be so tough. I didn’t have to tell her how I felt—she knew. My mother is the greatest person I have ever known. She is a brilliant, loving, compassionate woman with a wisdom that to this day blows my mind. Quietly powerful, infinitely supportive, absurdly selfless, she has always encouraged me to follow my heart even when it led far away or to seemingly bizarre pursuits. She is also incredibly brave (sometimes to my dismay), facing down four-hundred-pound sharks in deep ocean, hand-lining leaping blue marlin, taming wild two-thousand-pound stallions, breaking up street fights, keeping my dad and me in line. She has been a constant balancing force throughout all the madness of our lives—lifting us when we were down, providing perspective when we got too swept away by ambition, giving a hug when tears flowed. My mom is my hero. Without her the whole thing falls apart.

My father is a different type of character. He’s a loyal, emotional, eccentric (think Woody Allen meets Larry David with an adventurous spin), devoted dad who has been my best friend since day one. I can’t imagine how many hours we have spent together, playing basketball, throwing around footballs and baseballs, scouring ocean horizons for birds above schooling fish, traveling to chess tournaments and then martial arts championships all over the world. We have been an elite team since I was six years old and subsequently have been joined at the hip in our ambitions and, to a certain extent, our emotions. No matter how much perspective we tried to maintain, our senses of well-being often fluctuated with my competitive results. There was no way around this. After winning huge tournaments, all was well and the sky was the limit. When I was playing badly, everything could look bleak and our dreams absurd.

It is true that I played with the knowledge that my dad’s heart was on the line side by side with my own—but I also knew that he would love me regardless of the outcome. There is little question that some psychologists would frown upon such co-dependence between father and son, but when you are pursuing the pinnacle sometimes limits must be pushed. There are big games, climactic moments, final surges where you dig for energy and inspiration wherever you can find it and pick up the pieces later. One thing is for sure—through thick and thin, my dad has always been in my corner 100 percent.

After a month on Bimini, my pop got restless and arranged a match between me and the best chess player on the island. He was worried that I was taking too long away from the game, and also he was just itching to see me play again. I wasn’t so eager for the match, preferring to fish with my hand line and go diving for lobster. Chess was still a burden to me, but the idea of the Championship of Bimini sounded harmless and amusing. We tracked down the guy and faced off in a bar. He had gold teeth, and a huge gold necklace hanging down over the board—remnants of a drug-smuggling past. It took me a few minutes to get into the games but then I came alive, the old love trickling back. I recall the feeling of inevitability, like chess was part of me, not to be denied. Something steeled in my eight-year-old self that summer—I wouldn’t go out a loser.

When I got home in the fall, Bruce was preoccupied with book deadlines and had no time for me. He cancelled lesson after lesson, which felt like a terrible slap in the face. I had lost and now my teacher didn’t like me. The equation was simple. When we did meet, his mind was elsewhere and the lessons were technical and alienating. Maybe he was busy, but I was a kid in need.

I also transferred from the Little Red School House to the prestigious Dalton School on the upper east side of Manhattan. The transition was difficult—instead of a few blocks from home, school was now a long bus ride away. I missed my friends at Little Red and felt out of place with all the rich kids at Dalton. I remember the first time a couple of us went over to my new friend’s apartment uptown and I walked into what seemed like a palace. There were doormen and maids and chandeliers hanging from duplexed ceilings. I was confused by all this stuff and began to wonder if my family was somehow inferior. I am still ashamed of the memory of asking my dad to park around the corner when he came to pick me up so my friends wouldn’t see our beat-up green Plymouth that had a shot suspension and an alarming habit of jumping lanes on the West Side Drive.

I was a mess. My chess life had fallen apart, my teacher didn’t like me anymore, I missed my friends, and my family didn’t have a doorman or a fancy car. On top of all this a pretty girl I had a crush on at school had developed the habit of hitting me over the head with her shoes, which I didn’t realize (until she told me many years later) was a sign that she shared my feelings. I was a child in transition, and I needed some help getting through. A few weeks into the fall, Bruce saw that rushing through mechanical chess analysis was not what I needed, and so he took a step back and reconceived our chess life. Our lessons now included raucous speed chess sessions with breaks to toss a football outside. We began to laugh and connect as human beings as we had in our first sessions years before.

I went back to playing in Washington Square Park with my old buddies. The game became less haunted. I was having fun again. Then Bruce and I went to work. We plunged deep into the heart of the art, analyzing complex middlegame and endgame positions, studying the classics, developing my technical understanding. We started doing arduous visualization work, playing blindfold chess games and working through long variations in our heads, without moving the pieces.

Chess was different now. During those summer months when I questioned everything and decided to come back strong, I arrived at a commitment to chess that was about much more than fun and glory. It was about love and pain and passion and pushing myself to overcome. It might sound absurd, but I believe that year, from eight to nine, was the defining period of my life. I responded to heartbreak with hard work. I was self-motivated and moved by a powerful resolve. While a young boy, I had been all promise. I only knew winning because I was better than all the other children and there was no pressure competing against adults. Now there was the knowledge of my mortality. I had lost to a kid, and there were other children who were also dangerous rivals.

I was still the highest-rated player for my age in the country, and when I went to tournaments there was immense pressure. If I won, it was no big deal, but if I lost it felt like the sky would fall. There was one boy who was particularly alarming. His name was Jeff Sarwer. He was a scary child—small, often bald and barefoot. He didn’t go to school and his father had him studying chess twelve hours a day. When he played, Jeff would chant kill, kill, kill under his breath. The kid was all aggression, brilliant, a powerhouse over the board. When I had just gotten back from my summer away I arrived at the Manhattan Chess Club for a lesson with Bruce, and Jeff was sitting there playing a regular. He approached me with a challenge, which I accepted. I was rusty and not expecting much of a game—he blew me away. A couple of months later I went back to the Manhattan and returned the favor with a huge crowd surrounding the board. After I beat him, I heard that he sat crying in a corner for hours. Terrible. This was a bitter rivalry between children, and it felt like the end of the earth.

I spent many afternoons studying chess in my room, alone. Sometimes my dad tried to distract me, lure me away to play football or basketball, and I would have none of it. There was too much on the line. My parents worried that I had become too serious about chess, and my dad periodically told me that it was okay if I wanted to quit. They didn’t understand that quitting was not an option.

As the Nationals approached, my training got even more intense. I sharpened myself in the park, soaked in the street-smart advice of my hustler friends, and did more and more serious work with Bruce. I knew Sarwer was spending every waking minute working with Grandmasters, honing his razor-sharp game. He was a machine, annihilating strong adults in speed chess sessions and then humiliating them with his disdain. One day he showed up at the park when I wasn’t there, and all my buddies told him I was better. He laughed, and said “Josh is a putz.” They taunted him until he left my home turf. The New York chess scene was divided between his camp and mine. This was not child’s play anymore.

The Nationals were again held in Charlotte, North Carolina. I traveled to the tournament with my parents, baby sister Katya, and Bruce. This was the first tournament to which Bruce had ever come with me. He was not a competitor at heart and was deeply conflicted about children tearing each other apart under such pressure. I don’t really blame him. Three close friends of mine from Little Red also came to hang out at the tournament with their parents. They weren’t really chess players—this was more of a vacation for them. I was deadly serious. I played my games on the first board, isolated from the rest of the children once more. My parents waited in the hotel lobby, watching my game on a video monitor with throngs of other nervous moms and dads. My first round was difficult, but then I cruised through the field, winning my first six games.

Going into the last round, Jeff Sarwer and I had the only two perfect scores. I had harder pairings throughout the event, so if we drew the game I would win on tie-breaks—but no one was thinking draw.

Jeff was the only kid I was afraid of. Rumor was that he, his father, and sister had been sleeping in their car throughout the tournament. Between rounds he would sit on the floor, hugging his skinny knees and scowling at anyone who tried to speak to him. He had contempt for other kids, called them “ugly putzes” and smirked when approached. It would be easy to vilify him, but Jeff was a child dealt certain cards. His father was a brutal authoritarian, a messianic figure who channeled his crazy energy and ideas into creating the perfect chess machine. Although we never really connected on a personal level, I had great respect for Jeff. He loved the game and worked at it harder than anyone I knew. This would be war.

He had the white pieces, a small advantage (white moves first) that was magnified by our particular matchup. I had done a lot of preparation on the white side of my opening repertoire and was less confident with black. He started the game with tremendous aggression, coming straight after me with a very dangerous central pawn storm against my King’s Indian Defense. I had never seen this variation before. He moved quickly, playing with terrifying confidence, and I was on the ropes from the start. His central pawn phalanx seemed to be devouring me, pushing me back before the game even began. He bristled with cockiness and seemed to mock me, implying that I had no right to sit at his chessboard.

My chances looked slim right off the bat. Early in the middlegame I lost a pawn and then I tried to slow down his initiative by trading some pieces. This is risky—when you are down material, exchanging pieces increases your opponent’s advantage (consider how the ratio of 5 to 4 compares to 4 to 3; 3 to 2; 2 to 1; 1 to 0—as pieces come off the chessboard, a small material edge can gradually become overwhelming). But I loved the endgame, and headed for it like a safe house. When we traded queens Jeff seemed to snarl at me. He was an absolute killer, and he had me by the throat.

After three hours, the tournament hall was empty as we reached the end of the game. We were alone but for the television camera that was broadcasting to the hotel lobby where hundreds of people were gathered around the monitor, watching and wondering which little kid would be the champ and which would be crushed. The silence was suffocating—or maybe that was just my position. I had a knight and five pawns against his bishop and six pawns. It looked hopeless. I remember wrestling with the demons of the previous year’s heartbreaker while I searched for a way out. Nothing there. I went to the bathroom and cried. Then I washed my face, steeled myself, buckled down and went back to the board.

It was as if I was trapped in dark jungle, stuck in the underbrush, starving, bleeding and suddenly there was a little light. I’ll never forget the feeling when I sensed my potential escape. Often in chess, you feel something is there before you find it. The skin suddenly perks up, senses heighten like an animal feeling danger or prey. The unconscious alerts the conscious player that there is something to be found, and then the search begins. I started calculating, putting things together. Slowly the plan crystallized in my mind. I had to take my knight out of play and give up my remaining pawns to set up a long combination that would leave just two kings on the board—a completely counterintuitive idea. I found moves that were far beyond my years to save that game and I’m not really sure how I did it.

We drew the game and I became National Champion. I walked out of the playing hall in a daze, and was hit by a mob of cheering kids and parents who had been sucked into the drama of the battle. One coach, an International Master, asked me why I had made a certain decision in the middlegame and I had no idea what he was talking about. Chess was already a world away. The humanity of the moment was overwhelming. I watched Jeff slip around the crowd and approach his father, who rejected him with a cold stare. It was awful.