Think of the window again. Each photon has a 95 per cent chance of 				being transmitted and a 5 per cent chance of being reflected. But what 				determines these probabilities?

Well, the two different pictures of light—as a particle and as a 				wave—must produce the same outcome. If half the wave goes 				through and half is reflected, the only way to reconcile the wave and 				particle pictures is if each individual particle of light has a 50 per cent probability of being transmitted and a 50 per cent probability of 				being reflected. Similarly, if 95 per cent of the wave is transmitted and 				5 per cent is reflected, the corresponding probabilities for the transmission 				and reflection of individual photons must be 95 per cent and 				5 per cent.

To get agreement between the two pictures of light, the particlelike 				aspect of light must somehow be “informed” about how to behave 				by its wavelike aspect. In other words, in the microscopic 				domain, waves do not simply behave like particles; those particles 				behave like waves as well! There is perfect symmetry. In fact, in a 				sense this statement is all you need to know about quantum theory 				(apart from a few details). Everything else follows unavoidably. All 				the weirdness, all the amazing richness of the microscopic world, is a 				direct consequence of this wave-particle “duality” of the basic building 				blocks of reality.

But how exactly does light’s wavelike aspect inform its particle-like 				aspect about how to behave? This is not an easy question to 				answer.

Light reveals itself either as a stream of particles or as a wave. We 				never see both sides of the coin at the same time. So when we observe 				light as a stream of particles, there is no wave in existence to inform 				those particles about how to behave. Physicists therefore have a problem 				in explaining the fact that photons do things—for instance, fly 				through windows—as if directed by a wave.

They solve the problem in a peculiar way. In the absence of a real 				wave, they imagine an abstract wave—a mathematical wave. If this 				sounds ludicrous, this was pretty much the reaction of physicists 				when the idea was first proposed by the Austrian physicist Erwin 				Schrödinger in the 1920s. Schrödinger imagined an abstract mathematical 				wave that spread through space, encountering obstacles and 				being reflected and transmitted, just like a water wave spreading on a 				pond. In places where the height of the wave was large, the probability 				of finding a particle was highest, and in locations where it was 				small, the probability was lowest. In this way Schrödinger’s wave of probability christened the wave function, informed a particle what to 				do, and not just a photon—any microscopic particle, from an atom 				to a constituent of an atom like an electron.

There is a subtlety here. Physicists could make Schrödinger’s picture 				accord with reality only if the probability of finding a particle at 				any point was related to the square of the height of the probability 				wave at that point. In other words, if the probability wave at some 				point in space is twice as high as it is at another point in space, the 				particle is four times as likely to be found there than at the other 				place.

The fact that it is the square of the probability wave and not the 				probability wave itself that has real physical meaning to this day 				causes debate about whether the wave is a real thing lurking beneath 				the skin of the world or just a convenient mathematical device for 				calculating things. Most but not all people favour the latter.

The probability wave is crucially important because it makes a 				connection between the wavelike aspect of matter and familiar waves 				of all kinds, from water waves to sound waves to earthquake waves. 				All obey a so-called wave equation. This describes how they ripple 				through space and allows physicists to predict the wave height at any 				location at any time. Schrödinger’s great triumph was to find the wave 				equation that described the behaviour of the probability wave of atoms 				and their like.

By using the Schrödinger equation, it is possible to determine the 				probability of finding a particle at any location in space at any time. 				For instance, it can be used to describe photons impinging on the 				obstacle of a windowpane and to predict the 95 per cent probability 				of finding one on the far side of the pane. In fact, the Schrödinger 				equation can be used to predict the probability of any particle, be it a 				photon or an atom, doing just about anything. It provides the crucial 				bridge to the microscopic world, allowing physicists to predict everything 				that happens there—if not with 100 per cent certainty, at least 				with predictable uncertainty!

Where is all this talk of probability waves leading? Well, the fact 				that waves behave like particles in the microscopic world leads unavoidably 				to the realisation that the microscopic world dances to an 				entirely different tune than that of the everyday world. It is governed 				by random unpredictability. This in itself was a shocking, confidence-draining 				blow to physicists and their belief in a predictable, clockwork 				universe. But this, it turns out, is only the beginning. Nature 				had many more shocks in store. The fact that waves not only behave 				as particles but also that those particles behave as waves leads to the 				realisation that all the things that familiar waves, like water waves and 				sound waves, can do, so too can the probability waves that inform the 				behaviour of atoms, photons, and their kin.

So what? Well, waves can do an awful lot of different things. And 				each of these things turns out to have a semi-miraculous consequence 				in the microscopic world. The most straightforward thing waves can 				do is exist as superpositions. Remarkably, this enables an atom to be 				in two places at once, the equivalent of you being in London and New 				York at the same time.

1 Another interesting characteristic of the photoelectric effect is that no 					electrons at all are emitted by the metal if it is illuminated by light with a 					wavelength—a measure of the distance between successive wave crests—above a certain threshold. This, as Einstein realised, is because photons of 					light have an energy that goes down with increasing wavelength. And below a 					certain wavelength the photons have insufficient energy to kick an electron 					out of the metal.