The extraordinary ability of quantum computers to do enormous 				numbers of calculations simultaneously poses a puzzle. Though practical 				quantum computers are currently at a primitive stage, manipulating 				only a handful of qubits, it is nevertheless possible to imagine a 				quantum computer that can do billions, trillions, or quadrillions of 				calculations simultaneously. In fact, it is quite possible that in 30 or 				40 years we will be able to build a quantum computer that can do 				more calculations simultaneously than there are particles in the Universe. 				This hypothetical situation poses a sticky question: Where exactly 				will such a computer be doing its calculations? After all, if such a 				computer can do more calculations simultaneously than there are 				particles in the Universe, it stands to reason that the Universe has 				insufficient computing resources to carry them out.

One extraordinary possibility, which provides a way out of the 				conundrum, is that a quantum computer does its calculations in parallel realities or universes. The idea goes back to a Princeton graduate 				student named Hugh Everett III, who, in 1957, wondered why 				quantum theory is such a brilliant description of the microscopic 				world of atoms but we never actually see superpositions. Everett’s 				extraordinary answer was that each state of the superposition exists 				in a totally separate reality. In other words, there exists a multiplicity 				of realities—a multiverse—where all possible quantum events occur.

Although Everett proposed his “Many Worlds” idea long before 				the advent of quantum computers, it can shed some helpful light on 				them. According to the Many Worlds idea, when a quantum computer 				is given a problem, it splits into multiple versions of itself, each 				living in a separate reality. This is why the boy’s quantum personal 				computer at the start of this chapter split into so many copies. Each 				version of the computer works on a strand of the problem, and the 				strands are brought together by interference. In Everett’s picture, 				therefore, interference has a very special significance. It is the all-important bridge between separate universes, the means by which 				they interact and influence each other.

Everett had no idea where all the parallel universes were located. 				And, frankly, nor do the modern-day proponents of the Many Worlds 				idea. As Douglas Adams wryly observed in The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy: “There are two things you should remember when dealing 				with parallel universes. One, they’re not really parallel, and two, 				they’re not really universes!”

Despite such puzzles, half a century after Everett proposed the 				Many Worlds idea, it is undergoing an upsurge in popularity. An increasing 				number of physicists, most notably David Deutsch of the 				University of Oxford, are taking it seriously. “The quantum theory of 				parallel universes is not some troublesome, optional interpretation 				emerging from arcane theoretical considerations,” says Deutsch in his 				book, The Fabric of Reality. “It is the explanation—the only one that is 				tenable—of a remarkable and counterintuitive reality.”

If you go along with Deutsch—and the Many Worlds idea predicts 				exactly the same outcome for every conceivable experiment as more conventional interpretations of quantum theory—then quantum 				computers are something radically new under the Sun. They are 				the very first machines humans have ever built that exploit the resources 				of multiple realities. Even if you do not believe the Many 				Worlds idea, it still provides a simple and intuitive way of imagining 				what is going on in the mysterious quantum world. For instance, in 				the double slit experiment, it is not necessary to imagine a single photon 				going through both slits simultaneously and interfering with itself. 				Instead, a photon going through one slit interferes with another 				photon going through the other slit. What other photon, you may 				ask? A photon in a neighbouring universe, of course!





WHY ARE ONLY SMALL THINGS QUANTUM?


Quantum computers are extremely difficult to build. The reason is 				that the ability of the individual states of a quantum superposition to 				interfere with each other is destroyed, or severely degraded, by the 				environment. This destruction can be vividly seen in the double slit 				experiment.

If some kind of particle detector is used to spot a particle going 				through one of the slits, the interference stripes on the screen immediately 				vanish, to be replaced by more or less uniform illumination. 				The act of observing which slit the particle goes through is all that is 				needed to destroy the superposition in which it goes through both 				slits simultaneously. And a particle going through one slit only is as 				likely to exhibit interference as you are to hear the sound of one hand 				clapping.

What has really happened here is that an attempt has been made 				to locate, or measure, the particle by the outside world. Knowledge of 				the superposition by the outside world is all that is needed to destroy 				it. It is almost as if quantum superpositions are a secret. Of course, 				once the world knows about the secret, the secret no longer exists!

Superpositions are continually being measured by their environment. 				And it takes only a single photon to bounce off a superposition and take information about it to the rest of the world to destroy the 				superposition. This process of natural measurement is called 				decoherence. It is the ultimate reason we do not see weird quantum 				behaviour in the everyday world.2 Although naively we may think of 				quantum behaviour as a property of small things like atoms but not 				of big things like people and trees, this is not necessarily so. Quantum 				behaviour is actually a property of isolated things. The reason we see 				it in the microscopic world but not in the everyday world is simply 				because it is easier to isolate a small thing from its surroundings than 				a big thing.

The price of quantum schizophrenia is therefore isolation. As 				long as a microscopic particle like an atom can remain isolated from 				the outside world, it can do many different things at once. This is not 				difficult in the microscopic world, where quantum schizophrenia is 				an everyday phenomenon. However, in the large-scale world in which 				we live, it is nearly impossible, with countless quadrillions of photons 				bouncing off every object every second.

Keeping a quantum computer isolated from its surroundings is 				the main obstacle facing physicists in trying to construct such a machine. 				So far, the biggest quantum computer they have managed to 				build has been composed of only 10 atoms, storing 10 qubits. Keeping 				10 atoms isolated from their surroundings for any length of time 				takes all their ingenuity. If a single photon bounces off the computer, 				10 schizophrenic atoms instantly become 10 ordinary atoms.

Decoherence illustrates a limitation of quantum computers not 				often publicised amid the hype surrounding such devices. To extract 				an answer, someone from the outside world—you—must interact 				with it, and this necessarily destroys the superposition. The quantum 				computer reverts to being an ordinary computer in a single state. A 				10-qubit machine, instead of spitting out the answers to 1,024 separate 				calculations, spits out just one.

Quantum computers are therefore restricted to parallel calculations 				that output only a single answer. Consequently, only a limited 				number of problems are suited to solution by quantum computer, 				and much ingenuity is required to find them. They are not, as is often 				claimed, the greatest thing since sliced bread. Nevertheless, when a 				problem is found that plays to the strengths of a quantum computer, 				it can massively outperform a conventional computer, calculating in 				seconds what otherwise might take longer than the lifetime of the 				Universe.

On the other hand, decoherence, which is the greatest enemy of 				those struggling to build quantum computers, is also their greatest 				friend. It is because of decoherence, after all, that the giant superposition 				of a quantum computer with all its mutually interfering strands 				is finally destroyed; it is only by being destroyed—reduced to a single 				state representing a single answer—that anything useful comes out of 				such a machine. The world of the quantum is indeed a paradoxical 				one!

1 Binary was invented by the 17th-century mathematician Gottfried 					Leibniz. It is a way of representing numbers as a strings of zeros and ones. 					Usually, we use decimal, or base 10. The right-hand digit represents the ones, 					the next digit the tens, the next the 10 × 10s, and so on. So, for instance, 9,217 					means 7 + 1 × 10 + 2 × (10 × 10) + 9 × (10 × 10 × 10). In binary, or base 2, the 					right-hand digit represents the ones, the next digit the twos, the next the 2 × 					2s, and so on. So for instance, 1101 means 1 + 0 × 2 + 1 × (2 × 2) + 1 × (2 × 2 					× 2), which in decimal is 13.

2 I am totally aware that all this talk of quantumness being a “secret” that 					is destroyed if the rest of the world learns about it is a complete fudge. But it 					is sufficient for our discussion here. Decoherence, the means by which the 					quantum world, with its schizophrenic superpositions, becomes the everyday 					world where trees and people are never in two places at once, is a can of 					worms with which the experts are still wrestling. For a real explanation, see 					Chapter 5, “The Telepathic Universe.”