We never had any intention of using the weapon. But they were such a terribly troublesome race. They insisted on seeing us as the “enemy” despite all our efforts at reassurance. When they fired their entire nuclear stockpile at our ship, orbiting high above their blue planet, our patience simply ran out.

The weapon was simple but effective. It squeezed out all the empty space from matter.

As the commander of our Sirian expedition examined the shimmering metallic cube, barely 1 centimetre across, he shook his primary head despairingly. Hard to believe that this was all that was left of the “human race”!





If the idea of the entire human race fitting into the volume of a sugar 				cube sounds like science fiction, think again. It is a remarkable fact 				that 99.9999999999999 per cent of the volume of ordinary matter is 				empty space. If there were some way to squeeze all the empty space 				out of the atoms in our bodies, humanity would indeed fit into the 				space occupied by a sugar cube.

The appalling emptiness of atoms is only one of the extraordinary 				characteristics of the building blocks of matter. Another, of 				course, is their size. It would take 10 million atoms laid end to end to 				span the width of a single full stop on this page, which raises the 				question, how did we ever discover that everything is made of atoms 				in the first place?

The idea that everything is made of atoms was actually first suggested 				by the Greek philosopher Democritus in about 440 BC.1 Picking 				up a rock—or it may have been a branch or a clay pot—he asked 				himself the question: “If I cut this in half, then in half again, can I go 				on cutting it in half forever?” His answer was an emphatic no. It was 				inconceivable to him that matter could be subdivided forever. Sooner 				or later, he reasoned, a tiny grain of matter would be reached that 				could be cut no smaller. Since the Greek for “uncuttable” was “a-tomos,” 				Democritus called the hypothetical building blocks of all matter “atoms.”

Since atoms were too small to be seen with the senses, finding 				evidence for them was always going to be difficult. Nevertheless, a 				way was found by the 18th-century Swiss mathematician Daniel Bernoulli. 				Bernoulli realised that, although atoms were impossible to 				observe directly, it might still be possible to observe them indirectly. 				In particular, he reasoned that if a large enough number of atoms 				acted together, they might have a big enough effect to be obvious in 				the everyday world. All he needed was to find a place in nature where 				this happened. He found one—in a “gas.”

Bernoulli imagined a gas like air or steam as a collection of billions 				upon billions of atoms in perpetual frenzied motion like a 				swarm of angry bees. This vivid picture immediately suggested an 				explanation for the “pressure” of a gas, which kept a balloon inflated or pushed against the piston of a steam engine. When confined in any 				container, the atoms of a gas would drum relentlessly on the walls 				like hailstones on a tin roof. Their combined effect would be to create 				a jittery force that, to our coarse senses, would seem like a constant 				force pushing back the walls.

But Bernoulli’s microscopic explanation of pressure provided 				more than a convenient mental picture of what was going on in a 				gas. Crucially, it led to a specific prediction. If a gas were squeezed 				into half its original volume, the gas atoms would need to fly only 				half as far between collisions with the container walls. They would 				therefore collide twice as frequently with those walls, doubling the 				pressure. And if the gas were squeezed into a third of its volume, the 				atoms would collide three times as frequently, trebling the pressure. 				And so on.

Exactly this behaviour was observed by the English scientist Robert 				Boyle in 1660. It confirmed Bernoulli’s picture of a gas. And since 				Bernoulli’s picture was of tiny grainlike atoms flying hither and 				thither through empty space, it bolstered the case for the existence of 				atoms. Despite this success, however, definitive evidence for the existence 				of atoms did not come until the beginning of the 20th century. 				It was buried in an obscure phenomenon called Brownian 				motion.

Brownian motion is named after Robert Brown, a botanist who 				sailed to Australia on the Flinders expedition of 1801. During his time 				down under, he classified 4,000 species of antipodean plants; in the 				process, he discovered the nucleus of living cells. But he is best remembered 				for his observation in 1827 of pollen grains suspended in 				water. To Brown, squinting through a magnifying lens, it seemed as if 				the grains were undergoing a curious jittery motion, zigzagging their 				way through the liquid like drunkards lurching home from a pub.

Brown never solved the mystery of the wayward pollen grains. 				That breakthrough had to wait for Albert Einstein, aged 26 and in the 				midst of the greatest explosion of creativity in the history of science. 				In his “miraculous year” of 1905, not only did Einstein overthrow Newton, supplanting Newtonian ideas about motion with his special 				theory of relativity, but he finally penetrated the 80-year-old mystery 				of Brownian motion.

The reason for the crazy dance of pollen grains, according to 				Einstein, was that they were under continual machine-gun bombardment 				by tiny water molecules. Imagine a giant inflatable rubber ball, 				taller than a person, being pushed about a field by a large number of 				people. If each person pushes in their own particular direction, without 				any regard for the others, at any instant there will be slightly more 				people on one side than another. This imbalance is enough to cause 				the ball to move erratically about the field. Similarly, the erratic motion 				of a pollen grain can be caused by slightly more water molecules 				bombarding it from one side than from another.

Einstein devised a mathematical theory to describe Brownian 				motion. It predicted how far and how fast the average pollen grain 				should travel in response to the relentless battering it was receiving 				from the water molecules all around. Everything hinged on the size 				of the water molecules, since the bigger they were the bigger would be 				the imbalance of forces on the pollen grain and the more exaggerated 				its consequent Brownian motion.

The French physicist Jean Baptiste Perrin compared his observations 				of water-suspended “gamboge” particles, a yellow gum resin 				from a Cambodian tree, with the predictions of Einstein’s theory. He 				was able to deduce the size of water molecules and hence the atoms 				out of which they were built. He concluded that atoms were only 				about one 10-billionth of a metre across—so small that it would take 				10 million, laid end to end, to span the width of a full stop.

Atoms were so small, in fact, that if the billions upon billions of 				them in a single breath were spread evenly throughout Earth’s atmosphere, 				every breath-sized volume of the atmosphere would end up 				containing several of those atoms. Put another way, every breath you 				take contains at least one atom breathed out by Albert Einstein—or 				Julius Caesar or Marilyn Monroe or even the last Tyrannosaurus Rex 				to walk on Earth!

What is more, the atoms of Earth’s “biosphere” are constantly 				recycled. When an organism dies, it decays and its constituent atoms 				are returned to the soil and the atmosphere to be incorporated into 				plants that are later eaten by animals and humans. “A carbon atom in 				my cardiac muscle was once in the tail of a dinosaur,” writes Norwegian 				novelist Jostein Gaarder in Sophie’s World.

Brownian motion was the most powerful evidence for the existence 				of atoms. Nobody who peered down a microscope and saw the 				crazy dance of pollen grains under relentless bombardment could 				doubt that the world was ultimately made from tiny, bulletlike particles. 				But watching jittery pollen grains—the effect of atoms—was 				not the same as actually seeing atoms. This had to wait until 1980 and 				the invention of a remarkable device called the scanning tunnelling 				microscope (STM).

The idea behind the STM, as it became known, was very simple. 				A blind person can “see” someone’s face simply by running a finger 				over it and building up a picture in their mind. The STM works in a 				similar way. The difference is that the “finger” is a finger of metal, a 				tiny stylus reminiscent of an old-fashioned gramophone needle. By 				dragging the needle across the surface of a material and feeding its 				up-and-down motion into a computer, it is possible to build up a 				detailed picture of the undulations of the atomic terrain.2

Of course, there is a bit more to it than that. Although the principle 				of the invention was simple, there were formidable practical difficulties 				in its realisation. For instance, a needle had to be found that 				was fine enough to “feel” atoms. The Nobel Prize committee certainly 				recognised the difficulties. It awarded Gerd Binnig and Heinrich 				Rohrer, the IBM researchers behind the STM, the 1986 Nobel Prize 				for Physics.

Binnig and Rohrer were the first people in history to actually 				“see” an atom. Their STM images were some of the most remarkable 				in the history of science, ranking alongside that of Earth rising above 				the gray desolation of the Moon or the sweeping spiral staircase of 				DNA. Atoms looked like tiny footballs. They looked like oranges, 				stacked in boxes, row on row. But most of all they looked like the tiny 				hard grains of matter that Democritus had seen so clearly in his 				mind’s eye, 2,400 years before. No one else has ever made a prediction 				that far in advance of experimental confirmation.

But only one side of the atom was revealed by the STM. As 				Democritus himself had realised, atoms were a lot more than simply 				tiny grains in ceaseless motion.